5G human rights 
assessment
March 2021
ericsson.com/
 human-rights
 03 Executive summary
04 Introduction
04 Why a 5G human rights assessment?
05 Objectives of the assessment
 06 Scope of the assessment
06 Methodology of the assessment
09 Steps in the process
10 Ericsson™s business and its responsibility to respect human rights
10 The ICT ecosystem
14 What is 5G?17 Ericsson™s involvement with human rights impacts
19 Salient human rights issues related to 5G
19 What are salient human rights issues?
19 Salient human rights impacts identified for Ericsson™s 5G business
24 Detailed analysis of salient human rights impact areas
25 Ericsson™s own operations
31 Ericsson suppliers 35 Ericsson™s customers (mobile operators)
44 Ericsson™s involvement with governments
51 Ericsson™s broader societal impacts
58 Cross-cutting actions
58 The Sensitive Business framework
59 Responsible sourcing
60 Remedy and grievance mechanisms
61 Monitoring, governance and stakeholder engagement
61 Monitoring
61 Governance
62 Stakeholder engagement
63 Communication and reporting
64 Conclusion65 Appendix2Contents
 35G technology has the potential to 
enable a wide range of benefits for 
industries, consumers and society, as a 
result of increased connectivity. As is the 
case with any technology, however, there 
are crucial human rights risks associated 
with intended and unintended misuse. 
  Ericsson believes that access to 
networks and technologies that enable 
communication is a basic human need that underpins the principles of freedom 
of expression and opinion, and the free 
exchange of ideas and information. It 
also acknowledges its responsibility to 
respect human rights as articulated in the 
UN Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights
.This responsibility entails 
continuously conducting human rights 
due diligence of its operations, products 
and services and business relationships. 
This human rights assessment is a crucial 
part of ensuring that risks and impacts 
are identified at an early stage of the 5G 
rollout, taking action to mitigate risks 
and address impacts where needed, as 
well as proposing ways of collaboration 
across the ICT industry.
Based on a comprehensive assessment 
methodology, extensive research and 
internal and external stakeholder 
consultations, Ericsson has identified a 
wide range of impact areas, divided into 
five categories: 
1. Its own operations
 2. Its supply chain
 3. Its customer relationships
 4. Involvement with governments
 5. Broader societal impacts
  Each category includes distinct impact 
areas and further analysis of the severity of 
the impact, how Ericsson is connected, and 
the actions needed to mitigate the risk.
The first section of this report covers 
how the assessment was conducted, and 
then moves on to an overview of the ICT 
industry and 5G technology. 
  The bulk of the report provides a 
detailed overview of the identified 
salient impact areas connected to 5G 
technology and Ericsson™s business, 
concluding with a cross-cutting analysis of 
improvement areas and how the findings 
of the assessment will be embedded into 
company policies and procedures.
While Ericsson believes that this 
report is an important first step in 
taking responsibility for human rights 
issues connected to 5G technology, it 
acknowledges that additional efforts 
are required to effectively address the 
identified impact areas so far, and to be 
prepared to act when new issues emerge. 
The aim of this assessment is to be 
a starting point for further engagement 
and learning. Customers, suppliers, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), 
investors and other stakeholders are 
invited to reach out and engage in a 
constructive dialogue to find joint ways 
of working on existing issues, as well as 
raise concerns on topics that have not 
been covered.
 Ericsson is committed to its 
responsibility in the ICT ecosystem, and 
urges peers, partners and interested 
parties to join this effort.
Executive summary
The rollout of 5G brings huge benefits Œ but crucial 
human rights risks also need to be addressed.
 4Why a 5G human rights assessment?
Information and communication 
technology (ICT) is deeply integrated into 
our working and personal lives. Digital 
communication is more global, affordable 
and accessible than ever before, enabling 
billions of people to share ideas, acquire 
knowledge, improve their quality of life 
and boost livelihoods. ICT also promotes 
greater transparency and enhances many 
fundamental human rights Œ such as the 
right to health, education, freedom of 
assembly and freedom of expression.
Today, the role of ICT is an integral 
part of society, and its importance and 
prevalence will only increase in the 
years to come. Global 4G population 
coverage was around 80 percent at the 
end of 2019, while 3G coverage was 
around 95 percent. By the end of 2020, 
5G population coverage is estimated 
to reach 15 percent, equivalent to over 
1 billion people. By 2026, 40 percent 
of all mobile subscriptions globally are 
expected to be covered by 5G. Today, 
there are around 8 billion mobile 
subscriptions. This figure is estimated 
 to increase to 8.9 billion by the end 
 of 2025, of which 88 percent will be 
 for mobile broadband.¹
The scale and speed of this 
transformation is unprecedented. The 
evolving networked society, in which 
anything that can be connected will be 
connected, offers tremendous potential. 
As a recent example, the COVID-19 
pandemic, requiring social distancing 
and keeping millions at home, has placed 
significant demands on infrastructure. 
Systems supporting healthcare, 
education and businesses of all types are 
under stress. 
This massive disruption has highlighted 
the value of the network in enabling 
critical services to continue to function in 
providing a safer work environment for 
many by working remotely, and in ensuring 
ideas and opinions continue to be shared 
shared despite a global lockdown.
While the ICT infrastructure is a crucial 
part of our society, bringing benefits 
to users and communities, it is just as 
important to recognize the inherent risks 
of adverse impacts that a connected 
society brings. In particular, this relates 
to the potential for misuse of technology 
and unintended consequences. The same 
human rights that are enabled and
 strengthened through ICT could also
 be infringed and violated using
 this technology.
Ericsson has therefore decided, at an 
early stage of the 5G rollout, to conduct 
this Human Rights Assessment (HRA) 
to identify risks and potential impacts 
connected to the technology. While it 
continuously identifies, mitigates and 
addresses human rights risks connected 
to its business through embedded 
human rights due diligence processes, 
it is important to proactively recognize 
the potential for misuse and unintended 
consequences of new technology.
Additionally, as an industry leader 
and integral part of the ICT ecosystem, 
Ericsson has an important role in shaping 
developments in the industry through 
shared learning, best practice and the use 
of leverage. By identifying key risks related 
to its own operations, it also intends this 
HRA to be a springboard for constructive 
multi-stakeholder dialogue about ICT 
and human rights Œ with particular focus 
on emerging and increased challenges 
connected to 5G.
Introduction
¹ Ericsson Mobility Report, 
June 2020 and November 2020
40%By 2026, 5G is expected to 
 cover 40 percent of all mobile 
 subscriptions globally.
In this report, Ericsson takes an important first step, and proposes 
collaboration across the ICT industry to effectively address the 
identified impact areas, and prepare for emerging human rights issues.
 5Objectives of the assessment 
With the upcoming large-scale rollout of 5G 
technology, Ericsson wants to proactively 
take a human rights approach, by bringing 
an additional focus to the technology and 
how it can address potential negative 
impacts. 5G is groundbreaking technology, 
and core to Ericsson™s future offerings. 
It is therefore important to understand 
the potential human rights impacts 
connected to it. This assessment looks at 
the potentially negative impacts of the 
technology from the perspective of affected 
stakeholders. It aims to identify mitigating 
actions and further stakeholder consultation 
needed to properly address the issues. 
The aims of the assessment include 
identifying and prioritizing the most severe 
(salient) negative human rights impacts 
related to the emergence of 5G technology, 
understanding related stakeholder concerns 
and setting the internal strategy for 
preventing and mitigating potential human 
rights impacts over time. 
 Ericsson is keen to share learnings
 from the assessment with operators, 
global peers, industry initiatives and
 other interested parties, enabling 
collaborative approaches to addressing 
risks, demonstrating leadership on human 
rights and igniting momentum around 
these topics.
Companies can impact human rights
 in multiple ways, through their actions and 
decisions (or lack of action) and through 
their business relationships.
 Companies can affect the human rights 
of their employees and contract workers, 
workers in their supply chains, communities 
around their operations and customers and 
end users of their products and services. 
For a more detailed overview of Ericsson™s 
responsibility in connection to human rights 
impacts, see page 17.Ericsson may be involved with 
5G-related human rights impacts through 
its own activities (for example installing 5G 
base stations) and its supply chain (such as 
factory workers making/building hardware 
components for Ericsson technology), 
through to customers (such as misuse 
of technology for intrusive surveillance 
purposes). In most cases the impacts are 
not unique, or indeed solely attributable, 
to 5G technology (some already exist with 
3G and 4G technology), but many are 
heightened due to the combination of 5G 
with other emerging technologies, such as 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), the Internet of 
Things (IoT), augmented reality (AR), 
 Big Data and so on. 
  In many cases, impacts will occur in 
business relationships and Ericsson will 
work with mobile operators, governments 
and other parties to address these risks.
For each of these issues, there is a 
responsibility to ﬁknowﬂ what the risks are 
and ﬁshowﬂ what is being done to prevent 
and mitigate them. What follows in this 
report is an outline of the key risks identified 
through this process, along with initial 
suggestions for their mitigation.
 6Scope of the assessment
5G is not a limited set of technologies, 
but rather a new generation of 
communication and connectivity. It is 
therefore challenging to effectively limit 
the scope of this HRA to a specific set of 
products or offerings. For the purpose of 
this report, and in order to define a scope, 
we use the 5G definition as presented in 
the EU Commission Recommendation 
2019/534. This report is based on the 
understanding of the responsibility to 
respect human rights as laid out in the 
UN Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights (UN Guiding Principles 
or UNGPs). The identified impact areas 
are within the scope of responsibility laid 
out by the UNGPs. It is clear that many 
of these areas are in need of collective, 
multi-stakeholder action. There are also 
likely to be additional impact areas that 
need to be addressed from a societal 
perspective, and Ericsson is committed to 
contributing to those where it can.
 The scope of the impact areas is wide, 
covering its operations, supply chain, 
customer relationships and impacts on 
end users, as well as broader societal 
impacts. This HRA is, however, not a full 
company review of Ericsson, across all 
business and market areas, but focuses 
on 5G technology and rollout.
Ericsson has previously conducted 
country-specific human rights impact 
assessments, which have also informed 
the work on this report. Based on the 
findings of this assessment, additional 
country level HRAs will be conducted.
Methodology of the assessment
In this assessment, Ericsson collaborated 
with Shift, the leading center of expertise 
on the United Nations Guiding Principles 
on Business and Human Rights. Ericsson 
participates in Shift™s 
Business Learning 
Program
, and through this, Shift provides 
advisory support on implementation
of Ericsson™s responsibility to respect 
human rights as laid out in the UN 
Guiding Principles. For this 5G human 
rights assessment, Shift advised Ericsson 
on how to apply the lens of the 
 UN Guiding Principles, including 
developing the methodology for 
conducting the assessment, analyzing 
the business and its involvement with 
human rights impacts, engaging expert 
and other stakeholders, facilitating 
internal cross functional workshops, 
helping to design creative ways to 
build and apply leverage and providing 
feedback on how to embed respect for 
human rights organizationally. The final 
report was written by Ericsson, with input 
 from Shift.
Ericsson is committed to the UN Guiding 
Principles, which form the foundation of 
its human rights strategy and program. 
The methodologies used for this 
technology-based assessment, and those 
for the country-based assessments which 
preceded it, are intended to be aligned 
with the UN Guiding Principles.
ﬁ5G networks means a set of all 
relevant network infrastructure 
elements for mobile and wireless 
communications technology 
used for connectivity and value-
added services with advanced 
performance characteristics 
such as very high data rates 
and capacity, low latency 
communications, ultra-high 
reliability, or supporting a high 
number of connected devices. 
These may include legacy 
networks elements based on 
previous generations of mobile 
and wireless communications 
technology such as 4G or 3G. 
 5G networks should be 
understood to include all relevant 
parts of the network.ﬂ
²² EU Commission recommendation 2019/534 of 26 March 2019 Cybersecurity of 5G networks
 7Guiding Principle 18 sets out that the initial 
step of a human rights due diligence process 
is to identify and assess how a company™s 
activities and business relationships may 
pose risks to human rights.³ The process 
involves considering the potential negative 
impacts of current and planned activities 
and business relationships on individuals 
and communities, and sets priorities for 
action to mitigate any such risk, based 
 on the severity of the risk to people™s 
 human rights. 
 Through this process, businesses should 
pay particular attention to any human 
rights impacts on individuals or groups that 
may be at heightened risk of vulnerability or 
marginalization. Given the dynamic nature 
of business activity (particularly in relation 
to technology), assessments of human 
rights impacts should be undertaken at 
regular intervals, and ideally, prior to a 
proposed (new) business activity.
 To enable businesses to assess their 
human rights impacts robustly, they 
should seek to understand the concerns of 
potentially affected stakeholders (people 
and communities whose human rights 
might be adversely impacted by business 
operations, products and services) by 
consulting with them directly. In the event 
that such engagement is not feasible, 
businesses should consider consulting 
reasonable alternatives, such as credible 
proxies who can provide insight into the 
perspectives of affected stakeholders, as 
well as independent experts who can bring 
particular knowledge or expertise in relation 
to specific issues, geographical contexts or 
other relevant matters.
 Engaging with potentially affected 
stakeholders as part of an HRA of 
emerging technologies poses practical 
challenges. Firstly, it involves identifying 
who qualifies as a potentially affected 
stakeholder when technology, such as 5G, 
is so broadly used across sectors in society. 
Every user of mobile communication could 
potentially be an affected stakeholder. 
  
 Secondly, since the rollout of 5G is still 
in its early stages, most identified impacts 
will be potential. Based on this, it was 
decided to engage mostly with credible 
proxies, rather than individual users.
 The assessment of human rights impacts 
informs subsequent steps in the human 
rights due diligence process.
³ Human rights due diligence
 ﬁAn ongoing risk management process that a 
reasonable and prudent company needs to follow 
in order to identify, prevent, mitigate and account 
for how it addresses its adverse human rights 
impacts. It includes four key steps: assessing actual 
and potential human rights impacts; integrating 

communicating about how impacts are addressed.ﬂ
 8Extensive research and consultation with internal and external experts on the 
nature of the 5G technology and rollout activities and plans. 
Throughout the process, the assessment has identified and detailed specific 
groups of people that could be affected, such as supply chain workers, technology 
users, journalists, human rights defenders, Ericsson employees and contract 
workers (see page 23).
Experts and civil society organizations were consulted to help identify specific 
groups of people that would be particularly vulnerable to impacts. Interviews 
conducted included individuals and organizations who are at risk and/or work 
directly with such groups.
Several experts and CSO organizations consulted have a specific focus and 
expertise on gender-differentiated impacts of wireless technology.
The assessment has included all rights contained in the International Bill of Human 
Rights Œ meaning the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights and its two Optional Protocols. The assessment also 
included the principles concerning fundamental rights set out in the International 
Labour Organization™s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work.
For each identified risk to human rights, the specific internationally recognized 
human rights involved were identified, assessed and described.
As a basis for the assessment, typical relationships and affected people (and the 
human rights at risk) in the 5G ecosystem were mapped and analyzed. Internal 
and external stakeholders were consulted on all aspects, including the severity 
and likelihood of impacts, and were asked to consider how existing and future 5G 
activities could have specific human rights impacts and how Ericsson would be 
connected to them.
While this is an initial broad assessment of 5G technology and its rollout, Ericsson 
intends to regularly revisit the assessment, taking into account new developments 
and insights.
Some of the civil society groups consulted are likely to face risks themselves. Many 
have direct engagement with affected groups and conduct extensive research into 
how technology in general, and 5G in particular, impacts on human rights. Further 
direct engagement with affected stakeholders will be part of the country-based 
assessments that Ericsson will continue, into which this assessment will be an 
important input.
Ericsson has identified and developed, in consultation with internal and external 
stakeholders, appropriate actions to address the identified risks.
Assess the human rights context 
prior to a proposed business activity, 
where possible.
Identify who may be affected.
Pay special attention to human 
rights impacts on individuals from 
groups or populations that may be 
at heightened risk of vulnerability 
or marginalization.
Bear in mind different risks that may be 
faced by women and men.
Include all internationally recognized 
human rights as a reference point.
Catalog relevant human rights 
standards and issues.
Project how the proposed activity and 
associated business relationships could 
adversely impact the human rights of 
potentially affected stakeholders.
Undertake at regular intervals.
Consult with affected stakeholders 
directly; or in situations where such 
consultation is not possible, consider 
reasonable alternatives such as 
consulting credible, independent 
expert resources, including human 
rights defenders and others from 
civil society.
Assessment of human rights impacts 
informs subsequent steps in the 
human rights due diligence process.
Table 1: How this assessment aims to implement guidance on HRAs 
 and subsequent action as laid out in the UN Guiding Principles
 See commentary to UN Guiding Principles, pages 18Œ19
Implementation 
aimsTypical/necessary process element 
according to the UNGPs
 9Many identified risks are likely to occur in relation to Ericsson™s business partners, 
governments and other parties in its value chain. As a result, throughout the 
assessment and reflected in this report, Ericsson has considered how to build and 
apply leverage with partners in response to specific risks.
Throughout the assessment and subsequent action planning, Ericsson has 
engaged a wide range of internal functions and business areas to inform and 
understand the risks and devise appropriate responses and actions. It also aims to 
ensure strong future involvement from relevant functions to identify and address 
5G-related human rights risks on an ongoing basis.
Where a business enterprise causes 
or may cause an adverse human 
rights impact, it should take the 
necessary steps to cease or prevent 
the impact. If the business enterprise 
has leverage to prevent or mitigate 
the adverse impact, it should exercise 
it. If it lacks leverage, there may be 
ways for the enterprise to increase it.
The horizontal integration across the 
business enterprise of specific findings 
from assessing human rights impacts 
can only be effective if its human 
rights policy commitment has been 
embedded into all relevant business 
functions. This is required to ensure that 
the assessment findings are properly 
understood, given due weight and 
acted upon.
Desktop research
An initial landscape analysis of 
Ericsson™s business and 5G technology 
was completed. Desktop research was 
conducted to compile a broad list of 
potential people-related impacts, along 
with an understanding of the status of 
industry discussions on each topic. 
Interviews with internal and
 external expert stakeholders
In order to fully understand how 
people may be impacted, it is critical 
to incorporate into the assessment 
process the perspectives of those 
people whose human rights could 
be impacted by 5G technology. Only 
through dialogue, engagement and 
sharing of experiences can a full picture 
emerge of the human rights impacts 
that they may be experiencing. 
 Central to the assessment process 
is engagement with potentially 
affected stakeholders and experts 
and organizations who can credibly 
reflect these perspectives. In parallel 
with a range of internal interviews, 
gathering perspectives across the 
business, Ericsson and Shift also held interviews with a number of carefully 
selected experts and organizations 
such as the Global Network Initiative 
and Access Now, as well as follow-on 
interviews with select regional and local 
civil society organizations conducting 
research and outreach on digital and 
human rights. A list of interviews is 
contained in the appendix.
Workshop to identify key impacts 
 and develop an action plan
Key insights from both the stakeholder 
interviews and the desktop research 
formed the basis of an initial analysis 
of impacts that were presented and 
discussed at a day-long Ericsson workshop 
attended by a broad cross-section of 
internal stakeholders. These included 
representatives from all business areas 
as well as group functions such as 
Technology, Legal Affairs, People (Human 
Resources) and Government Relations. 
  The analysis of each potential impact 
was tested with the group and further 
insights were gathered to help inform the 
prioritization of the issues.
 Following on from the workshop some 
further, clarifying desktop research 
was conducted, as well as additional 
interviews with experts and civil society 
organizations to discuss an initial list of 
identified potential human rights impacts 
related to 5G. Based on the outcomes of 
the workshop and stakeholder dialogues, 
detailed internal discussions were also 
held to identify effective and viable actions 
to mitigate the risks, as well as plan for 
further engagements.
Implementation 
aimsTypical/necessary process element 
according to the UNGPs
Steps in the process
 10The ICT ecosystem
The ICT sector consists of a wide range 
of companies delivering products and 
services, such as mobile operators, 
network vendors, web-based platforms, 
component and hardware manufacturers 
and software developers. It is important 
to note that the telecom industry is 
highly regulated, requiring companies 
in the sector to comply with licensing 
and standardization requirements. 
Government authorities and regulatory 
bodies therefore also play an important 
role in the ecosystem. 
 The different actors share a strong 
degree of interdependence. However, the 
type of human rights risks they face Œ as 
well as their capacity to address them 
Œ may vary considerably, depending on 
their place and role in the value chain. 
Understanding these interdependencies, 
as well as the unique roles of each actor, 
better enables companies to effectively 
identify and address salient human rights 
risks and create opportunities to cooperate 
in addressing risks and exercising leverage.
 In order to better understand the 
context in which Ericsson operates and 
is potentially involved with human rights 
impacts, the scope of the identified key 
impact areas (discussed in the next 
chapter), and the types of actions that are 
undertaken to address them, this section 
of the report provides an overview of 
the ICT ecosystem and the major actors 
within it.
Network vendors
Network vendors, such as Ericsson, 
provide fixed and wireless telecom 
network equipment, solutions and 
software, such as switches, routers 
and radio base stations. The role of the 
vendor is to build the infrastructure 
that provides the basis for all fixed 
and mobile communications. Network 
vendors do not deal directly with issues 
involving third-party requests, such 
as government demands to remove or 
block online content, requests for user 
information, or network shutdowns. 
  
The main customers of network vendors 
are mobile operators. Vendors are not 
consumer-facing.
 Ericsson does not manufacture 
surveillance technology, but does 
enable lawful interception functionality 
through interfaces in our networks, 
when required by law. It is important to 
distinguish between lawful interception 
and intrusive surveillance technologies 
that enable mass surveillance. The 
former is a legally mandated and 
standardized interception capability, 
while the latter is often unregulated and 
allows for arbitrary surveillance. 
  Mass surveillance, in contrast to 
lawful interception, refers to the bulk 
access and/or collection of many users™ 
communications without prior suspicion 
of individual targets. The basics of 
lawful interception are explained under 
the relevant impact area of this report. 
Ericsson™s business and 
 its responsibility to respect 
human rights
Ericsson, headquartered in 
Sweden and founded in 1876, is 
one of the leading providers of ICT 
infrastructure. Its main customers 
are mobile operators, and it operates 
in more than 180 countries, with 
approximately 100,000 employees 
worldwide. 
 Ericsson™s portfolio is divided 
into four business areas: Networks, 
Digital Services, Managed Services 
and Emerging Business:
Ł Networks Œ developing, delivering 
and supporting telecom networks 
by providing hardware, software 
and servicesŁ Digital Services Œ enabling 
digitalization through services 
such as network management and 
operations, revenue and customer 
management, communication 
services, core network and 
network functions virtualization, 
infrastructure and application 
development and maintenance
Ł Managed Services Œ managing, maintaining and optimizing 
telecom networks and IT 
operations on behalf of customers
Ł Emerging Business Œ accelerating 
new and sustainable businesses 
beyond Ericsson™s traditional 
core business; for example, 
through technologies such as AI, 
automation, IoT connectivity, 
virtual reality (VR)/AR and 
 edge computingThis section explores the workings of the ICT ecosystem, what 5G is, and its global 
impact; and assesses Ericsson™s involvement with human rights impacts and the 
opportunities for applying leverage and building collaboration.
 11Mobile operators
Mobile operators provide local and 
international telecommunications 
services to users; both voice and data, 
including internet access. Operators are 
granted licenses to operate and obtain 
spectrum allocation by governments 
in each country of operations, and 
therefore have ongoing relationships 
 with governments. 
  The contracts to provide telecom 
services, between a government and 
the operator, typically include legal 
obligations to provide interception 
capabilities as part of the license to 
operate. Operators are also required 
to respond to government requests 
to remove or block online content, or 
temporarily shut down networks.
It is important to note that these requests 
and capabilities in many cases are used 
for legitimate purposes such as public 
safety, emergency response and crime 
prevention. It is, however, also possible 
to misuse the technology in ways that 
adversely impact human rights. This will 
be further explained in the ﬁDetailed 
analysis of salient human rights impact 
areasﬂ section (see page 24) of this report. 
 The necessary technology 
enabling such functionality is also 
highly standardized by regional and 
international standardization bodies.
 12Over the top companies (OTTs)
OTTs include internet service providers, 
enterprise and security software 
developers, IT service firms and content 
providers offering internet-based services, 
including search, email, banking and 
commerce, social networking, content, 
location-based services and weather 
information, as well as a wide range of 
applications, databases, storage and 
cloud computing and software. 
 A distinction could be made between 
service/app providers that provide an app 
that the user downloads to the device, as 
opposed to one native on their device or 
which uses a browser and thus resides 
entirely in the cloud.
Hardware and component manufacturers
Hardware manufacturers produce 
devices such as mobile phones, laptops 
and tablets, as well as cars, home 
appliances and accessories, which are 
increasingly connected to the internet 
through 5G. 
Such devices often include apps that 
need personally identifiable information, 
such as location-based services, to make 
optimal use of the functionality. With an 
increased number of connected devices, 
the additional amount of generated data 
can have human rights implications if not 
managed correctly.
 The supply chain of hardware 
manufacturers is often complex and 
opaque, with several tiers of component 
manufacturers between the final 
assembly sites and the mining operations 
extracting minerals and metals vital for 
the functioning of the end products.
Third-party application companies
These companies offer apps in areas 
such as entertainment, business, health 
and education. They are downloaded by 
consumers to their mobile devices, via 
marketplaces such as Apple Store and 
Google Play. Many app providers rely 
on the use of personal information to 
provide and optimize services to users. 
Connected industries
The current industry transformation 
towards smart factories and automation 
requires manufacturing sites, logistics 
and distribution centers to be connected, 
in order to secure reliable communication 
between a growing number of remote-
controlled and autonomous robots and 
automated guided vehicles on the factory 
floors. Furthermore, companies in all sectors 
are increasingly using private, dedicated 
networks for internal communications. 
 This development means that other 
industries are also becoming part of the ICT 
ecosystem, and facing issues connected to 
data generated through IoT devices and 
dedicated networks, as well as questions of 
trustworthy AI.
More devices and more data mean 
potential human rights risks.
Figure 1: The ICT ecosystem
ICT
ecosystem
Hardware manufacturers
Produce devices such as mobile 
phones, laptops and tablets, as well as 
 cars, home appliances and accessories
Over the top companies (OTTs)
Provide internet-based services like 
search, email, banking and commerce
Third-party application companies
Offer entertainment, business, 
health and education apps. 
Downloaded by consumers to 
mobile devices, via marketplaces 
such as Apple Store and Google Play
Connected industries
Increasingly utilize IoT 
devices, dedicated networks 
and AI solutions
Network vendors
Build the infrastructure that 

and mobile communications
Mobile operators
Provide telecommunications 
services to users
Governments
Manage and allocate radio spectrum, 
set regulatory frameworks, establish 
laws for the ICT industry and have 
various enforcement mechanisms
Standardization bodies
Produce voluntary 
standards, rules and 

for ensuring quality and 
interoperability for the
 ICT industry
 13Governments
Governments set regulatory frameworks 
and establish laws for the ICT industry and 
have various mechanisms for enforcing 
such national laws. Mobile operators 
are granted a license to operate from 
the government. Despite widespread 
privatization of the telecom industry,  
some operators are still wholly or partly 
state-owned. 
  Government oversight primarily 
concerns services and content, not 
equipment, and therefore impacts 
operators and other service providers 
more directly than equipment vendors.
 Governmental regulatory agencies are 
tasked with ensuring compliance with laws 
and regulations and establishing rules. 
Their role may include:
Ł implementing the authorization 
framework that allows companies 
and investors to establish new ICT 
businesses and provide ICT services 
Ł regulating competition
Ł regulating network interconnection
Ł implementing universal service/access 
mechanisms to ensure the widespread 
(and affordable) diffusion of ICT
Managing and allocating the radio 
spectrum, law enforcement and 
first responders are integral to the 
government™s role in the ICT ecosystem. 
 Law enforcement officers seek access 
to certain information in networks for 
the fulfillment of their duties, while first 
responders need critical location and other 
information to respond to emergencies.
Standardization bodies
National, regional or international 
organizations produce voluntary 
standards (a set of rules or technical 
specifications for ensuring quality 
and interoperability) for the ICT 

to create global communication systems 



best technology to emerge and are key 
to ensuring robust choices for consumers 

 Standardization organizations relevant 

Ł International Telecommunication 



of the United Nations responsible for 
all matters related to information and 
communication technologies
Ł 3G Partnership Project (3GPP) Œ 
a consortium of seven national 
or regional telecommunication 



Ł Internet Engineering Task 





 
 
 
governing the use of the radio-frequency 
spectrum, while 3GPP organizes 

discuss change requests against 3GPP 
specifications. These change requests 


all aspects of mobile systems (including 
security standards to secure privacy and 
 
 Ericsson is actively participating in 
standardization bodies relevant for mobile 
communication systems and promotes 


73GPP is a group of seven telecom 
standards organizations responsible 
for developing and maintaining 2G, 
3G, 4G and 5G standards.
 14What is 5G? Each new generation of 
mobile networks has brought 
significant developments in how 
we communicate and the role 
digitalization plays in our society, 
and has enabled new business 
models to grow.
 This section of the report provides 
an overview of how 5G works and 
highlights a number of use cases 
relevant for Ericsson, as examples of 
what 5G will enable.
 Overall, 5G will exponentially 
increase the capacity and efficacy 
of networks, compared to previous 
generations. Data will become 
the most important form of 
communication, rather than voice and 
SMS. Download and upload speeds 
will become considerably faster, and 
latency, or the time it takes devices to 
communicate with wireless networks, 
will also drastically decrease.
SpectrumAn important concept to understand 
when talking about mobile 
communication in general, and 
5G specifically, is spectrum. Unlike 
previous generations, 5G operates on 
three different spectrum bands:
Ł  
Low-band spectrum
 is the primary 
band used today for 4G networks
 Ł Mid-band spectrum provides faster 
speeds and lower latency
Ł High-band spectrum is also referred 
to as millimeter wave
The fifth generation is the next leap in mobile communications, 
enabling a wide range of new use cases and capabilities
The second generation increased digitalization and 
provided new services like SMS
The first generation of mobile networks enabled wireless 
voice communication
The third generation provided mobile web
 browsing capabilities
The fourth generation enabled the smartphone, 
 mobile video streaming and higher data speeds
2G1G3G4G5GMobile telecommunications networks 
consist of four major domains:
Ł Highest speed (up to 10Gbps)
 and significantly lower latency
Ł Low coverage area and poorer 
 building penetration
Ł Require an increased number of small 
cells to function (low-power base 
stations to cover smaller areas)
High-band spectrumŁ Faster speed (up to 1Gbps)
 and lower latency
Ł Fail to penetrate buildings as 
 effectively as low-band spectrum
Ł Slower speed (will not reach beyond 
approximately 100Mbps)
Ł Limited use cases
Ł Coverage over large areas and 
 effective wall penetration
Mid-band spectrumLow-band spectrum
Figure 2: Mobile network generations
Figure 3: Spectrum
The core network (CN) 
provides coordination 
between different parts 
of the access network 
and connectivity to 
 the internet
The transport network 
provides connectivity 
between the RAN and 
the CNThe device Œ such as a smartphone, a tablet 
device or a router Œ
 is also called the user 
equipment
The radio access 
network (RAN) uses 
radio frequencies 
to provide wireless 
connectivity to 
 the devices 15Use cases Lower latency, faster data speeds and 
higher spectrum bands will enable new 
and enhanced use cases throughout 
society. Below are a few examples 
showcasing how 5G can be used.
Safer manufacturing through 
 factory automation
With 5G Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency 
Communication (5G URLLC), automated 
assembly processes become more stable 
and reliable, while increasing the personal 
safety of factory workers. Humans and 
robots will be able to interact and work 
together; a machine can, for example, lift 
heavy objects, while the worker attaches 
components. 
 For this to work, the robot needs to 
be in constant communication with the 
factory, the workers and its surroundings. 
It needs to be mobile and have 
complete physical range of motion and 
environmental sensors.
 The sensors will also detect if a 
factory worker reaches into their range 
and, due to low latency, instantly stop, 
thereby preventing injuries. This instant 
response with guaranteed reliability 
is not possible through traditional 
Wi-Fi or previous-generation mobile 
networks, meaning that such machines 
have historically required restrictive 
wired technology.
 Automation in industries such as 
mining, considered a highly hazardous 
environment, can also reduce work-
related injuries and fatalities, as well 
as reducing CO2 emissions by increased 
efficiency of the vehicles. 
Access to healthcare
From specialist oncology to simple ailment 
diagnosis, a large percentage of the world™s 
population cannot reach or afford the 
healthcare professionals that they need 
to treat them. Higher bandwidth, low 
latency and network slicing can effectively 
contribute to increase specialist medical 
resources in remote regions. The ability to 
allow the remote transfer of haptic, tactile, 
audio and visual technologies enables a 
surgeon or doctor to perform a diagnosis or 
even surgery on a patient anywhere in the 
world. The principle of the solution is simple.
 A doctor uses specialized haptic 
feedback gloves and VR equipment 
to operate on a patient via a robotic 
counterpart, potentially thousands of 
miles away. The gloves provide touch 
feedback from sensors on the robot arms, 
and the VR equipment places the surgeon 
in the same sensory environment as the 
patient. The combination of these two 
technologies removes both the obstacle 
of distance and the burden of travel cost, 
giving patients access to specialists, no 
matter where they are located.
 The ideas of remote healthcare and 
robotic surgery are not completely new, 
but the introduction of 5G provides a 
new dimension and enables reliable 
communication that has the ability to 
perform mission-critical procedures. 
 For example, to operate safely, a 
surgeon needs to be able to react to 
physical and visual stimuli in under 
 10 milliseconds. When operating remotely, 
these stimuli will need to be delivered 
over a network, but the time required to 
compress and decompress video content 
vastly exceeds the safe reaction time. With 
5G supporting the solution, these problems 
are sidestepped. 
 5G connectivity enables much 
greater bandwidth usage, while intelligent 
network slicing separates and prioritizes 
mission-critical functions, such as machine communication, which is required for 
the surgery. Most importantly, the low-
latency attributes of 5G mean the haptic 
feedback is felt in near real-time through 
the surgeon™s gloves.
 Another use case within the healthcare 
sector is Narrowband Internet of 
Things (NB-IoT), which enables a 
wide range of devices and services to 
be wirelessly connected using cellular 
telecommunications bands. NB-IoT has 
broad practical applications, but one of 
the most crucial is how it can be used 
to improve standards of healthcare. 
With NB-IoT, equipment can be fully 
integrated via the cloud, which allows for 
enhanced data gathering and analysis and 
dramatically boosts machine 
 efficiency and the reliability of 
 network communications.
10msTo operate safely, a surgeon 
 needs to be able to react to 
 physical and visual stimuli in 
 under 10 milliseconds.
 16Autonomous vehicles
While self-driving vehicles will be made 
possible and safer as a result of lower 
latency in 5G, this is still some way in the 
future. Connected vehicle technology, on 
the other hand, is already becoming a vital 
part of road safety. Cellular technology has 
a role to play in reducing traffic incidents; 
human error is far more likely to cause 
accidents than overtly dangerous driving. 
 Cellular vehicle-to-everything (C-V2X) 
will enable vehicles to automatically respond 
to objects, such as road signs, hazards 
and people crossing the street, almost 
instantaneously. The use cases require 
near-immediate response times in order to 
increase safety outcomes on the road. 
 With an average 5G latency of 10ms, 
compared to 50Œ100ms for 4G, a car 
connected through 5G would for example 
significantly reduce the distance traveled 
before fully stopping, which could be the 
difference between life and death.
AR and VR
The COVID-19 pandemic has shown 
the need to interact, engage and stay 
connected, even in times of crisis. 5G 
will make AR and VR applications more 
immersive, far more interactive 
 and accessible.There are a wide range of AR/VR 
 applications in different sectors, ranging 
from education to customer service and 
interactive meetings. By establishing a 
reliable and adaptable system through 
virtualization and software capabilities 
that enable high speed and low 
latency, 5G can allow tactile, visual and 
sound data to be shared in a way that 
combines immersive technology and 
physical existence. 
  The inclusion of network slicing can 
also guarantee specific resources to 
support the differing demands of each 
service or application. For instance, with 
the power of 5G, an expert mechanic can 
use tactile gloves when demonstrating 
how to replace a car engine; at the same 
time, the students can follow the expert 
via separate AR/VR goggles as if they 
are there in the same room. At work, we 
will be able to have virtual meetings 
where it appears as if two people are 
sitting together in a room, allowing for 
more interactive 3D experiences rather 
than today™s video conferences.
 These are just a few examples of what 
5G will bring to industries, consumers 
and key societal functions. While the use 
cases presented aim at solving current-
day challenges and provide clear 
benefits to society, this report focuses on 
the risks associated with the technology. 
The next sections will elaborate on 
key impact areas, discuss potential 
mitigations and ways forward to ensure 
that the rollout of 5G does not bring 
unintended consequences of adverse 
human rights impacts.
 17Ericsson™s involvement with 
 human rights impacts
The UN Guiding Principles, which form 
the basis for this assessment and for 
Ericsson™s understanding of its human 
rights responsibilities, describe three ways 
in which a company can be involved with 
human rights impacts.
1. It may cause the impact through its 
 own activities. 
2. It may contribute to the impact through 
its own activities Œ either directly or 
through another entity (government, 
business or other). 
3. It may neither cause nor contribute to 
the impact, but be involved because 
the impact is caused by an entity with 
which it has a business relationship and 
is linked to its own operations, products 
or services.
The nature of a company™s response in 
each of these three scenarios (cause, 
contribution, linkage) varies according to: 
Ł whether the company primarily needs to 
change its own practices (when it causes 
that impact or it contributes to it), or 
to use leverage to effect change in the 
practices of a third party (contribution 
and linkage)
Ł whether the action required is solely 
forward-looking and preventative, or 
also includes remedying (or contributing 
to remedy for) past impacts
See page 31 for more detail of specific 
impacts Ericsson can be involved with 
and whether it causes, contributes to, or 
is linked to such impacts. 
Expected response
Where a company causes a negative 
human rights impact, it should take 
the necessary steps to cease or prevent 
the impact and remediate it. While 
addressing such impacts will frequently 
be within a company™s control, leverage 
may be relevant in certain instances, 
such as where a company is under 
pressure to take actions that would 
harm human rights (for example, by 
a government or by the purchasing 
decisions of a buyer).
 Where a company contributes, or may 
contribute, to a negative human rights 
impact, it should take the necessary steps 
to cease or prevent its contribution and 
use its leverage with others to mitigate 
any remaining impact to the greatest 
extent possible. It should also take steps 
to ensure the remediation of any actual 
impact that has occurred, including in 
some instances by providing remedy to 
the extent of its contribution.
 Where a negative impact is directly 
linked to a company™s operations, 
products or services through a business 
relationship, the company has a 
forward-looking responsibility to seek to 
prevent the impact from continuing 
 or recurring.
  This business relationship may be 
a direct one, or with an entity more 
remote in the company™s value chain. 
In a linkage situation, one of the most 
effective ways of deploying leverage 
may be to attempt to influence those 
that have caused the impact to 
 provide remedy.
Ericsson™s opportunities 
 for applying leverage
Ericsson is expected to use its leverage 
where it is involved with an impact 
together with one or more third parties, 
or where an impact is otherwise 
directly linked to its operations, 
products or services through a business 
relationship. Leverage is defined as 
the ability to effect change in the 
wrongful practices of a third party that 
causes harm. In other words, leverage 
is a company™s ability to influence the 
behavior of others.
 Leverage is at the heart of what 
companies can realistically be expected 
to do when faced with complex human 
rights challenges. While a dominant 
or influential commercial position in a 
business relationship is likely to help a 
company™s ability to use leverage, it is 
important not to consider leverage in 
purely commercial terms. 
  Many companies are likely to face 
situations in which they lack such a 
commercial position and need to 
 think creatively about how to build 
sufficient leverage.
 Ultimately, leverage is about 
creating the opportunity to change 
how people think and behave. In the 
context of the Guiding Principles, 
it is about changing the thinking and behavior of key people within a 
supplier, contractor, business partner, 
customer, client or government, 
where that organization™s actions are 
increasing risk to human rights. 
 Doing Business With Respect for Human Rights
 OHCHR™s The Corporate Responsibility to Respect Human Rights: An Interpretative Guide New York and Geneva, 2012, p. 15
 18For example, 
human rights expectations (aligned with the 
UNGPs) in supplier contracts and customer agreements and 
bidding processes.
Offering human rights training to suppliers and/or other 
business partners and joint supplier-buyer assessments.
Peer-learning initiatives such as joint action platforms for 
specific salient issues that are prevalent in the industry (for 
example privacy and surveillance, trustworthy AI).
Undertaking joint HRAs with an NGO, financier or export 
credit agency; collaboration with international union 
federation on labor rights; engaging a government on 
aligning ICT laws with human rights standards.
Multi-stakeholder industry initiative (Global Network 
Initiative); supporting multi-stakeholder campaign for 
mandatory human rights due diligence legislation; engaging 
in multi-party initiative on strengthening responsible AI.
A. Traditional commercial leverage:
 Leverage that sits 
within the activities a company routinely undertakes in 
commercial relationships, such as contracting.
B. Broader business leverage:
 Leverage that a company 
can exercise on its own, but through activities that are 
not routine or typical in commercial relationships, such as 
capacity building.
C. Leverage together with business peers:
 Created through 
collective action with other companies in or beyond the 
same industry.
D. Leverage through bilateral engagement:
 Generated 
through engaging bilaterally with one or more other actors, 
such as government, business peers, an international 
organization or a civil society organization.
E. Leverage through multi-stakeholder 
collaboration:
 Generated through action collectively with business peers, 
governments, international organizations and/or civil 
society organizations.
 
Thinking about leverage broadly
In determining what action to take, 
Ericsson can consider, in consultation 
with its stakeholders, the above listed 
types of leverage and select what 
type (or combination) could be most 
effective given a specific human 
rights risk in a specific situation.
 It can be helpful to identify 
specific moments in establishing and 
maintaining a business relationship 
when there may be a particular 
opportunity to exercise leverage, 
for example when a new customer 
or supplier agreement is being 
negotiated, provision of certain 
assistance or implementation of 
monitoring requirements, or when a 
complaint or grievance is logged 
 and processed. 
Where a company remains 
unsuccessful in preventing and/or 
mitigating the risks in its value chain, 
it needs to consider the following 
factors when thinking about ending a 
relationship on human rights grounds, 
where possible in consultation with 
relevant stakeholders:
Ł The severity of the negative 
impacts involved
Ł The extent to which the company has 
tried to use leverage and/or has run out 
of options for building further leverage
Ł Whether or not the relationship is a 
crucial one for the company (does 
it provide an essential product or 
service for which no reasonable 
alternative exists)
Ł Whether there would be other negative 
human rights impacts as a result of 
ending the relationship
Building the option for termination 
on human rights grounds into a 
relationship right from the start is an 
important source of leverage in itself 
and the threat of termination can, in 
some cases, be a powerful incentive for 
improved performance.
Table 2: How Ericsson uses leverage
Existing or potential 
examples for Ericsson
Type of 
leverage
 19What are salient human rights issues?
Human rights impacts are the most acute 
social, environmental and economic 
impacts a company can have on people, 
negatively impacting on their enjoyment 
of certain of their human rights. Salient 
human rights issues are in turn the most 
severe human rights impacts. They stand 
out because they are at risk of the most 
severe negative impact in connection with 
the company™s operations or value chain. 
They are the human rights priorities for 
the company. They need the most urgent 
attention to prevent actual harm from 
happening, or to manage the harm that 
has occurred. 
 In practice, impacts that rise to this level 
of severity converge strongly with risk to 
the business, as seen in the many instances 
where they lead to reputation-damaging 
campaigns, disruption and delays to 
operations, increased costs of managing 
conflict, litigation and other costs or loss in 
value to the business. This is particularly 
evident over the medium to long term.
The idea of ﬁsalienceﬂ is central to the UN 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, which are the global standard in 
this field. To identify a company™s salient 
human rights issues, a company needs 
to map out the various impacts it could 
be involved with across its operations 
and value chain. It then identifies which 
impacts would be most severe by assessing 
how grave they would be (the scale of the 
impact), how widespread (the scope) and 
how difficult the impact would be to put 
right (remediability). 
A secondary factor in the determination 
of salient human rights issues is the 
likelihood of these impacts occurring, by 
examining the business environment, 
business relationships, the type of 
business activity and the prevalence of 
vulnerable groups of people. The most 
severe issues that have the greatest 
likelihood of occurrence are the ones 
that the company should prioritize for 
action, although a low-likelihood, 
 high-severity impact should be among 
the salient issues. 
 The assessment should be 
informed by an understanding of the 
perspectives of those people who 
could be impacted, and conclusions 
should be tested with stakeholders 
inside and outside the company. Once 
a company understands its salient 
human rights issues, it has taken a key 
initial step towards implementing the 
UN Guiding Principles.
 The concept of ﬁsalienceﬂ provides 
companies with a robust method for 
identifying the most important human 
rights issues, assessed through an 
understanding of what the company 
does, where it works and who it 
works with, and informed by, but not 
derived from, the views of the most 
relevant stakeholders. Given the strong 
convergence between the most severe 
impacts on people and risks to the 
business, this method can also identify 
issues that are ﬁmaterialﬂ to the business 
under most definitions, provided they 
take a medium- to long-term view.
Salient human rights 
 issues related to 5G
 UN Guiding Principles
 Salient Human Rights Issues
Salient human rights issues discussed in this section may be affected 
by the rollout of 5G. Ericsson has identified key areas ranging from job 
impacts, to accidents and the misuse of personal data.
Salient human rights impacts 
identified for Ericsson™s 
5G businessIn the course of the assessment, 
a number of salient human rights 
issues were identified.
Ł Salient risk areas
: Among the 
many potential impacts and 
human rights issues identified, 
there were some impacts that 
could be grouped together in 
similar categories (such as health 
concerns, privacy, data loss and 
misuse), which we termed human 
rights risk areas.
Ł Potential impacts
: Within each 
risk area, the impacts that were 
identified during the process
  are categorized.
Ł Human rights affected
: Most identified impacts potentially 
affect multiple specific 
internationally recognized human 
rights. These are described in 
detail in the ﬁDetailed analysis of 
salient human rights impact areasﬂ 
section (see page 24) of this report 
and in a non-exhaustive overview 
table for each risk area.
Ł Potentially impacted people
: Where possible the specific 
individuals or groups of individuals 
have been identified. These are 
again described in detail in the 
ﬂDetailed analysis of salient 
human rights impact areasﬂ 
section and in the following tables.
 20Figure 4: Human rights risk areas and impacts
Livelihoods/job transitions
Human rights
risk areas
Broader societal impacts
Health concerns
Supply chain impacts
Privacy, data loss and misuse
Network surveillance 
 and shutdowns
Network segmentation 
 and differentiation
Security and critical networks
    Livelihoods/job transitions
5G is likely to accelerate the 
 replacement of workers by machines
Significant portions of the working population can be 
impacted in the future, as 5G enables machines/robots 
to take on more specialized and professional work (not 
simply unskilled jobs on factory floors).
    Health concernsWorkplace accidents related
to installation of 5G equipment
Not new to 5G, health and safety risks facing Ericsson 
employees and many subcontractors arise in connection 
with the work involved in the physical rollout of 5G, 
specifically issues relating to working from heights and 
with electricity and road safety.
5G-enabled technology requires different skills
New technologies, enabled through 5G, will make many 
white-collar jobs redundant and/or requiring new skills 
that not all current Ericsson employees, contract workers 
and other staff may yet possess.
Perceived health risks related to 5G radio waves
While Ericsson, the wireless industry, expert bodies such 
as the World Health Organization and governments are 
confident, based on extensive research, that there is no 
established link between adverse health effects and 
radio waves from mobile communication equipment, 
perceived health risks exist and need to be addressed.
    Supply chain impacts
The manufacturing of 5G hardware includes 
 existing risks in the supply chain
This mainly concerns labor rights, including working 
conditions, bonded labor and the prevalence of 
migrant workers in factories in Ericsson™s supply 
chain related to hardware manufacturing.
5G will increase demand for specific minerals, 
 potentially from conflict-affected/high-risk areas
5G will result in increased use of lithium batteries, which 
contain nickel and cobalt.
010203 21    Privacy, data loss and misuse
Increase of IoT will lead to increasing amounts and 
 storage of personal data that can be abused
Data generated from social media, apps and the 
ﬁubiquitous connectionﬂ of IoT devices will generate 
a huge amount of personal information that is 
extractable by authorities. This could be used for 
legitimate law enforcement or other public policy 
purposes, or it could be used to abuse human rights.
    Security and critical networks
Attacks on critical infrastructure will expose 
 people who rely on them to severe risks
Critical infrastructure such as water utilities and power 
(nuclear, gas, hydro) will increasingly be connected 
through 5G. The risk of a cybersecurity attack on any of 
these installations could potentially also have significant 
repercussions for communities™ human rights. While 
this threat is not new to 5G, it will be important to 
analyze how application of 5G technology in critical 
infrastructure poses risks to human rights.
Personal data can be sought by
 unscrupulous private and public actors
Key to the concerns are the myriad ways in which 
businesses will potentially seek access to specific and 
highly personal, sensitive information, in order to predict 
and monetize future behavior, potentially without the 
users™ express knowledge. This may exacerbate existing 
risks to already at-risk users, including children.
0405    Network segmentation and differentiation
Network slicing enables more private networks, 
 linking them more closely to any company abuses
Private networks are already being built to support, 
for example, mining operations and smart factories. 
5G becomes a more integral part of running such 
businesses, which makes the networks more closely 
linked to potential adverse impacts that these 
business relationships may be involved with.
Segmented networks could facilitate 
 human rights abuse by governments
Private networks will increasingly become mission 
critical for government agencies. Such networks are 
primarily for the purpose of internal communications, but 
can nevertheless be a vital part in enabling an agency™s 
activity, creating a link to potential human rights impacts 
as a result of the government™s actions.
Network segmentation may affect net neutrality
The concerns related to net neutrality are that the 
increased possibilities of network slicing in 5G 
networks could lead to differentiation in offerings, 
and impact on the ability of users to utilize certain 
critical services fully. This could, for example, lead to 
reduced ability to: access online education platforms 
(affecting children™s development, among other 
impacts), access basic and/or critical information 
and services (such as doctor appointments), or 
effectively do a job remotely.
06 22    Network surveillance and shutdowns
5G may increase some surveillance capabilities, 
 including more precise geolocation data
The shorter-range 5G radiofrequency waves require a 
higher number of small cells, which may enhance the 
ability of a service provider to pinpoint the location of a 
device user. This change could place people already at 
increased risk in a potentially more vulnerable position.
    Broader societal impacts
Uneven rollout of 5G may lead to (or exacerbate) 
 the digital divide and other inequalities
Uneven distribution in the access to, use of or 
impact of ICT between any number of distinct 
groups could further be accelerated by 5G. 
Such ﬁgroupsﬂ may be defined based on social 
(including generations), geographical or
geopolitical criteria, or otherwise, including 
between different countries and parts of the 
world, as well as within countries.
Trustworthy AI
There is a need to ensure that rights-respecting,
ethical principles and regulations guide the development 
of AI in order to mitigate against a host of unintended 
negative consequences (many of which likely remain 
unidentified today), such as bias, discrimination and 
invasion of privacy.
Networks can be shut down in discrete ways providing 
more tools for governments to target specific groups
5G technology, with its potentially denser deployment 
of cell towers, may give governments more tools to 
request service providers to shut down highly discrete 
parts of the network. For example, targeting a single 
apartment building, office or indeed parts of a country 
populated by an ethnic minority.
0708 23Human rights affected
 Privacy
Freedom of thought
Freedom of expression
Life and security
Health and safety
Just and fav. cond. of work
Trade union rights
Adequate standard of living
Non-discriminationConflict-related human rights
People potentially affected
Employees
Contract workers
Supplier workers
CommunitiesEnd users (in general)
Additional impacts on specific groups
JournalistsHuman rights defenders
Political opponents
Ethnic minoritiesWomen
Children
Network surveillance 
 and shutdowns
Broader societal 
impacts
Security and 
 critical networks
Network segmentation
and differentiation
Supply chain 
 impactsPrivacy, data loss 
 and misuseLivelihoods / 
 job transitions
Health  concerns
 Note: This should be read concurrently with the ﬁDetailed analysis of salient human rights impact areasﬂ section (see page 24).
 24The overview of the key impact areas 
presented in the previous chapter 
shows that risks are present throughout 
Ericsson™s value chain. In this section, in 
order to more clearly identify how Ericsson 
is connected to the particular human 
rights risks, who needs to be involved in 
its further due diligence and what type of 
leverage and other approaches Ericsson 
needs to build to prevent and mitigate the 
risks as it rolls out 5G, the impact areas are 
divided into categories based on Ericsson™s 
business relationships.
 In the subsequent analysis, five 
separate ways in which Ericsson can be 
connected to the identified human rights 
risks have been distinguished: 
1. Own operations
2. Supply chain
3. Customers (mobile operators)
4. Involvement with governments
5. Broader societal impacts
 For each connection and related impacts, 
the following analysis is detailed in the 
section below:
Ł What is the impact?Ł Why is it severe?
Ł How is Ericsson involved in 
 the impact?Ł What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
Ł What actions is Ericsson taking 
 and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
 mitigate this impact?
This section explores Ericsson™s own operations, suppliers, 
customers, involvement with governments and broader 
societal impacts, and how they relate to human rights risks.
Detailed analysis of 
salient human rights 
impact areas
 25Ericsson™s own 
 operations
Replacement of 
factory workers 
by machines
Risks of accidents 
and fatalities 
related to 
rollout of 5G 
infrastructure
Violations of the 
right to privacy in 
relation to loss or 
misuse of personal 
information
Livelihoods/ 
 job transitions
Occupational health and safety
Privacy, data loss 
and misuseEricsson™s own 
operations
Salient 
 risks:Potential 
impacts:Impactsconnected to:
Just transition 
 to new world 
 of work for 
 white-collar 
 workers
 26What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility? 
Ericsson has its own manufacturing and assembly sites in Brazil, China, Estonia, 
India, Mexico, Poland, Romania and the US. As manufacturing processes become 
more automated and efficient, enhanced by AI/ML and the availability of 5G 
technology (specifically, the ability of factories to run their own private cellular 
network), the opportunity for businesses to eliminate operating expenses (opex), 
including people-related costs, becomes very tangible. In this scenario, the risk to 
people could lead to shop floor factory workers being made redundant and being 
replaced by automated processes/machines. 
 Over time, leaps in technological automation may lead to the replacement of 
skilled Ericsson workers by machines. While embracing technology in this way may 
result in improved occupational health and safety conditions for the remaining 
workers, due to the elimination of dangerous tasks from the factory floor, many 
people will likely lose their jobs or see their livelihoods at serious risk.
Losing jobs and livelihoods has the potential to severely impact thousands of 
Ericsson factory workers, gravely impacting a number of their rights, such as 
the right to just and favorable conditions of work and the right to an adequate 
standard of living. Work and income are important pre-conditions to the fulfillment 
of other rights, such as the right to food, health, family life and so on. Additionally, 
unemployed, unskilled or low-skilled workers will face difficulty in finding a 
replacement job without skills training. 
 Over time, even highly skilled workers/employees may find it difficult to secure 
a new job as AI capabilities scale up and deployment costs reduce. Long-term 
unemployment can potentially lead to further negative impacts such as mental 
health issues.Ericsson owns and operates the manufacturing sites where these impacts may 
occur, where unions and governments are relevant parties to engage in social 
dialogue and provide retraining programs. Special attention is warranted for 
workers that are employed through third-party agencies at the sites, who may be 
at increased risk, and where Ericsson may be contributing to impacts and have less 
control to address the risks. This risk is likely to be more severe in countries with 
weak social protections by the government.
Ericsson has a responsibility to timely identify and address the adverse impacts 
arising from its business decisions; in particular to provide workers with sufficient 
warning and progressively manage people™s transition to new jobs, especially the 
most vulnerable groups of workers that may not be able to make the transition 
on their own (including temporary and contract workers). This should involve 
engaging with legitimate representatives and is likely to involve providing and/or 
organizing and advocating for appropriate skills training for these workers. 
Table 3: Livelihoods/job transitions
Replacement of factory workers by machines
 27What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ł Ericsson should undertake an analysis to determine which roles across the 
business (not just the more obvious roles such as factory shop floor workers) 
 are vulnerable to elimination resulting from technology developments, in the 
near- and longer-term future.
Ł This analysis should further identify which groups of workers may be most 
vulnerable for these impacts and include the following steps:
Ł In advance of any changes being shaped and implemented, organize a 
formal consultation process with the potentially impacted workers and 
their representatives (such as trade unions) to present the rationale for the 
decision, the timelines under consideration and share and discuss plans for 
how best to put the transition in place. This consultation process should be 
informed and guided by collective bargaining agreements and could include 
a series of group discussions with the broader impacted team, along with 
individual conversations with the impacted workers, providing them with the 
opportunity to air their concerns in private. 
Ł Ericsson will develop plans to support vulnerable workers, including skills 
training and job transition. This could include assessing individual skills 
and strengths, determining if there are opportunities for redeployment 
to other parts of the business. Where this does not exist, Ericsson could 
investigate the potential for workers to secure similar kinds of work in other 
companies in the area (so that they would not have to involuntarily travel 
significant distances).
Ł Ericsson needs to engage with its third-party labor providers to address 
similar challenges with respect to its flexible workforce. Where necessary, it 
could build additional leverage with such parties to address impacts on the 
most vulnerable workers.  
Ł The potential for workers to be impacted in relation to sophisticated 
automation is a trend across the industry and will become a broader 
business trend in the years ahead. In order to address systemic causes, 
and build leverage to achieve scalable solutions, Ericsson can also engage 
with relevant governments (national and local) and trade unions where 
job cuts will be made, explaining the forecast and the need to provide 
retraining and potentially economic diversification and advocate for social 
security provisions.
Ł Ericsson can also have a role to play in engaging with industry peers and 
international trade union organizations, in an effort to find appropriate and 
systemic responses involving training/reskilling programs and changes to 
secondary and third-level education curriculums, in order to meet future job 
and skills demands.Replacement of factory workers by machines
 28What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
New technologies, including 5G, AI and others, are going to make many jobs 
redundant and/or require new skills (such as research and development and AI 
solutions) that not all current employees, contract workers and other staff may 
possess (yet).
Ericsson employs workers, including through third-party contractors, in network 
management centers that may become increasingly redundant as networks are 
managed through AI and related technologies. Also, many of Ericsson™s business 
areas will need to evolve as 5G is rolled out, to continue to add value to the business. 
While for many this may be a common feature of their careers, for others it may not 
bring the same opportunities and for yet others it may pose significant risks to their 
employability and livelihoods leading to potentially significant related impacts. 
A decision by Ericsson to replace jobs that are currently performed by humans, with 
machines and AI technology, could involve Ericsson causing human rights impacts 
on workers. This impact could occur in relation to positions currently undertaken by 
Ericsson™s own employees in the various business areas and functions, as well as 
long-term contractors and consultants supporting those areas; employees and third-
party workers in network centers; or other Ericsson operations that are supported by 
subcontractors with significant numbers of people. Again, increased risk is likely to 
occur in countries where there are low levels of social protection and where there are 
not many affordable outside programs to retrain and reskill workers.  
Ericsson has a responsibility to consider impacts for these workers on their livelihoods, 
in particular for the most vulnerable groups, and develop plans to prevent and 
mitigate impacts on them. Engagement and collaboration with trade unions is a 
crucial step in this process.
Ł As a first step, Ericsson should map Œ short, mid and long term Œ which workers 
are going to need to transition to new types of work, requiring new skills, including 
workers that are employed through third parties or subcontractors (in collaboration 
with those contractors).
Ł Subsequently, identify those groups of workers that are particularly vulnerable, 
including contract workers, workers in countries with fewer social protections, 
with limited options for affordable retraining or jobs for which no easy transition 
can be made.Ł For Ericsson employees a transition plan should be developed to move them as 
much as possible to new positions and jobs, in consultation with workers and 
worker representatives.
Ł Additionally, Ericsson needs to engage with contracting agencies to plan as far 
as possible in advance, identify groups at particular risk and work jointly to put in 
place appropriate mitigation plans, including through engagement with potentially 
affected workers and their representative unions. 
Ł Where necessary, also engage with governments, peers, unions and others to help 
shape and plan for the future technology ﬁworld of workﬂ that is aligned with the 
responsibility to respect human rights. 
Just transition to new world of work for white-collar workers
Table 4: Livelihoods/job transitions
 29What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking, 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
A significant portion of injuries and fatalities related to Ericsson™s business stems 
from incidents during field activities to install, dismantle and manage radio towers 
and related equipment. Additionally, manual handling of products is an increased 
risk in the rollout of 5G, due to the size and shape of 5G products. This concerns 
both Ericsson™s own employees as well as subcontractors across the world that are 
engaged in these activities. This risk is not new, and indeed Ericsson has implemented 
strong occupational health and safety measures to mitigate the risks.
In general, installing radio products and related equipment involves high-risk 
safety activities, including working with electricity, climbing and working at 
heights. The possible related impacts are of a grave nature, including loss of life, 
long-term injuries and health impacts and resulting impacts on livelihoods and 
families, in particular in countries lacking decent personal or health insurance or 
social protections for workplace-related incidents. Putting those grave risks into 
the context of a highly competitive international 5G rollout could potentially have 
impacts in several geographies.
Ericsson-employed field personnel and subcontractors carry out this work across 
many countries. In addition, specialized agencies provide a range of these services to 
Ericsson, varying in nature depending on the country. In cases where Ericsson knows 
or should know about poor health and safety practices of subcontractors and does not 
implement credible measures to address the risks, it could be seen to be contributing 
to impacts.
Ericsson™s responsibilities include ensuring a safe working environment and culture by 
implementing a health and safety management system that includes training, tools 
and processes to perform work safely. Ericsson has a system in place for reporting, 
analyzing and investigating incidents and a grievance channel that enables its 
workforce or anyone to raise issues. Ericsson works closely with its subcontractors to 
advance all of these systems in the same way and with the same level of seriousness 
and effectiveness.
Ł Ericsson already manages health and safety risks closely and implements 
a strong set of mitigating measures across the business. Ericsson applies 
the same level of health and safety requirements globally, internally and in 
relation to subcontractors. These measures include a proactive approach to 
identify and mitigate risks, a system for investigating incidences, a grievance 
channel that enables its workforce and subcontractors to raise issues and the 
provision of appropriate remedies for workers who sustain injuries. Ericsson 
will maintain the strong focus on these risks and decrease the number of major 
incidents and fatalities.
Ł Ericsson has approved a new target to reach zero fatalities and lost workday 
incidents by 2025. This applies to employees, subcontractors and suppliers.
Ł Ericsson is in the process of developing a new global Environmental Health 
and Safety Tool, in order to more effectively monitor performance and 
compliance metrics.Ł Ericsson™s deployment of a global wellbeing framework and program and the 
transition to ISO 45001 with a focus on leadership and employees™ participation 
and consultation, will increase workforce engagement and awareness.
Ł Find out more about our approach to occupational health and safety.
Risks of accidents and fatalities related to rollout of 5G infrastructure
Table 5: Occupational health and safety
 30What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ericsson collects and holds data that includes personal information of employees and 
other workers. Additionally, Ericsson processes end-user data for its customers. This 
data handling is not new to 5G. If such data were to fall into the wrong hands, it could 
be exploited by third parties for instance for blackmail. 
 In addition, in some jurisdictions it may be expected or even required for companies 
to log certain personal information that poses risks to human rights, such as 
someone™s ethnicity, religion, gender or marital status. Governments or other actors 
could seize such information and use it for persecution or other illegitimate purposes.
Databases with personally identifiable information often contain the data of large 
numbers of people. Loss of such data can lead to identity theft, blackmail or the 
public sharing of sensitive information.
 Governments or other third parties might want to abuse such information and 
impact not only privacy rights but also a broader set of human rights, particularly in 
relation to vulnerable groups.
In case of impacts, third parties violate the actual rights, but if Ericsson is not taking 
adequate and proactive measures to protect data and consider privacy and related 
risks of individuals, then it is at risk of contributing to these impacts.
Ericsson needs to make sure it has in place Œ and implements Œ effective privacy and 
cybersecurity policies to respect the right to privacy in all contexts and for all people 
it holds data on. Where Ericsson is processing data of end users (on behalf of mobile 
operators or other customers), this risk and needed measures would equally apply. 
 Ericsson has a responsibility to make sure that data is well protected and that it 
proactively identifies risks to privacy and related risks. In particular, it should comply 
with the European Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and related 
standards and consider rollout across all its operations. 
 In addition, it should specifically identify privacy risks in each jurisdiction of 
operation and proactively assess and manage risks to people that are particularly 
vulnerable, such as women in certain countries, LGBTQI individuals in many countries 
and ethnic and other minorities.
Ł Ericsson recently strengthened the Group Privacy Compliance Office and Product 
Privacy Office and its focus on the implementation of the privacy compliance 
framework, closely connected to other ongoing compliance activities as well as 
Group Security and Product Security frameworks.
Ł As part of this, Ericsson has established a global privacy strategy, which includes 
GDPR requirements as a baseline for global processes, which can be adapted 
where locally required. Related to regulatory developments, like the Schrems 
II decision, Ericsson is constantly assessing privacy impacts and adjusting 
processes where needed.
Ł Find out more about Ericsson's approach to privacy.
Violations of the right to privacy in relation to loss or misuse of personal information
Table 6: Privacy, data loss and misuse
 Schrems II decision Œ InfoCuria
 31Ericsson suppliersLabor rights risks in the supply 
 chain, especially related to
 hardware manufacturing
5G rollout increases demand for specific 
minerals that could be sourced from 
conflict-affected and high-risk areas
Supply 
 chain impactsMinerals from 
conflict-affected 
and high-risk areas
EricssonsuppliersSalient 
 risks:Potential 
impacts:Impactsconnected to:
 32What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility?
Risks related to labor rights, working conditions, bonded labor and exploitation of 
migrant workers in factories are present in Ericsson™s supply chain. This is not unique 
to 5G, but the rollout of new technology requires new equipment to be built and may 
involve risks for workers, especially when there are short delivery times and other 
pressures that may increase risks for workers.
Throughout the supply chains there are likely to be a vast number of workers, and 
possibly people in communities, who could be affected. Also, impacts on health, 
livelihoods and discrimination, among others, can have grave consequences for the 
individuals concerned.Ericsson has thousands of first tier suppliers in many countries where social 
protections and working conditions are limited or even poor. Those suppliers may also 
have supply chains where labor rights and other human rights are at risk. Depending 
on Ericsson™s actions and due diligence process, it may be contributing to or directly 
linked to the impacts.
Wherever there is a connection between Ericsson™s products, services and activities, 
and potential or actual human rights impacts, Ericsson has a responsibility to identify 
risks and take action to prevent and mitigate the harm. The UN Guiding Principles 
give direction on how to prioritize among the many potential supplier relationships 
and impacts and take targeted and reasonable action to contribute to preventing and 
mitigating impacts in the supply chain. Such actions can include social audits, but also 
a focus on training and capacity building in the supply chain, joint action with peers, 
suppliers and trade unions and addressing root causes, for example by engaging 
governments where that might contribute to solving systemic issues. 
 Ericsson should also consider its own buying practices, including prices paid and 
payment terms, and whether these enable suppliers to respect human rights. Where 
Ericsson has identified that through its own actions or omissions, it has contributed 
to human rights impacts by a supplier, it should contribute to providing remedy in an 
appropriate form.
Labor rights risks in the supply chain, especially related to hardware manufacturing
Table 7: Impacts in supply chain
 33What actions is Ericsson taking, 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ł Ericsson has an established Responsible Sourcing Program to continuously 
identify and mitigate human rights risks in its supply chain. For more information 
on the Responsible Sourcing Program 
click here
. Several steps are currently being 
taken to improve the Responsible Sourcing Program, including updating its audit 
procedures and implementing a responsible sourcing tool, which will improve the 
management and dialogue with suppliers.
Ł Ericsson has for a number of years identified labor rights in its supply chain as 
one of its salient risk areas. In 2020, it conducted a more detailed analysis of 
which specific human rights are at risk in its supply chain. For more information 
on the process and the salient human rights risks 
click here
.Ł A next step in proactively mitigating and addressing these risks is to develop an 
action plan with concrete actions and initiatives. Such actions are planned to 
go beyond traditional social auditing, as well as further upstream in its supply 
chain, where many of the identified risks are more severe.
Ł Ericsson sources a significant number of products and services from a limited 
number of countries. For these countries, Ericsson should consider carrying out 
more detailed analysis on the degree to which laws and regulations are aligned 
with international human rights standards and where some of the risk areas are 
in its sector. This could then provide the basis to develop guidance for the sourcing 
organization and suppliers to identify, prevent and mitigate risks in the supply 
chains in those countries.
Ł Particular attention should lie with Ericsson™s own practices and how these could 
contribute to and potentially exacerbate human rights impacts, for instance due 
to short delivery times or other pressures on suppliers. The COVID-19 crisis has 
demonstrated that suppliers can quickly run into liquidity problems if their buyers 
delay payments, exposing their workers to severe vulnerabilities. Ericsson has 
seen limited impacts on its supply chain due to the COVID-19 pandemic and has 
therefore been able to uphold orders made and supply. However, it is monitoring 
the situations closely and has communicated to suppliers how human rights might 
be impacted during the pandemic and what steps suppliers are required to take to 
mitigate such risks. Suppliers are also encouraged to raise any issues with Ericsson 
in order to find joint ways of addressing them.
Ł Ericsson has conducted specific human rights training for the wider sourcing 
organization and included this training as mandatory for all supplier-facing job 
roles. This training is continuously evaluated, and updated when needed, to make 
sure the sourcing organization stays up-to-date with recent developments and 
emerging risks.
Labor rights risks in the supply chain, especially related to hardware manufacturing
 34What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Many Ericsson products, as with electronics in general, require minerals and metals to 
function. It is well known that these minerals and metals are often mined in conflict-
affected or other high-risk areas (for example as a result of weak or non-existent 
rule of law, presence of migrant workers or child labor) where severe human rights 
violations linked to the extraction can be found. 5G products will to a large extent rely 
on the same minerals and metals. However, there is an increased demand specifically 
for cobalt, copper, nickel and aluminum, primarily used in lithium batteries.
Human rights impacts related to conflict and other high-risk contexts are often 
among the most egregious and severe, including loss of life, forced labor, child 
labor, gender-based violence, environmental and water impacts on communities, 
impacts on indigenous peoples, human rights defenders and other minorities and 
vulnerable groups.   
If Ericsson™s radio equipment, batteries and other products contain minerals that 
originate from conflict-affected and/or other high-risk contexts for human rights, 
and 5G rollout increases demand for such minerals, then human rights impacts 
associated with the conflict would be directly linked to the 5G equipment. As such, 
Ericsson has a responsibility to seek to prevent and address these impacts by using 
its leverage over supply chain actors further upstream. If Ericsson consistently and 
knowingly uses conflict minerals (or minerals that have other human rights impacts) 
while failing to conduct adequate due diligence, it may over time be seen to be 
contributing to such impacts.
To address risks related to sourcing of raw materials, Ericsson has a responsibility to 
ensure that it has effective policies and processes in place that are aligned with the 
UN Guiding Principles and the OECD Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply 
Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas. 
 In relation to the rollout of 5G specifically, Ericsson has a responsibility to fully 
map the supply chains of minerals and metals where there is an increased demand 
and ensure these are sourced responsibly. Where needed, it should also work 
collaboratively to increase leverage and reach scale in its supply chains.
Ł Ericsson already has a program on sourcing of minerals from conflict-affected and 
high-risk areas. This program is currently being expanded to include additional 
minerals. For more information 
click here
 and here
.Ł Conflict-related impact is one of Ericsson™s salient human rights risk areas in its 
supply chain. It is currently working on developing action plans to address each of 
the salient human rights risk areas. Since the rollout of 5G will increase the demand 
for specific minerals, Ericsson will focus efforts on mapping those supply chains. As 
an example, Ericsson is currently in dialogue with other large Swedish companies in 
order to work more proactively on the ground in the Democratic Republic of Congo 
in relation to cobalt mining. Learnings and results from this project will hopefully be 
scalable to other countries and supply chains of other minerals.
5G rollout increases demand for specific minerals that could be sourced from conflict-affected and high-risk areas

 35Ericsson™s customers 
 (mobile operators)
Perceived health 
risks related to 
 5G radio 
 wave exposure
Privacy and 
related impacts 
resulting from 
ubiquitous 
processing of 
personal data
People relying 
 on critical networks may be 
impacted due to 
network failures
Human rights 
abuses by 
companies that rely on segmented 
networks
Net neutrality 
concerns resulting 
from network 
segmentation
Health concernsPrivacy, data loss 
and misuseSecurity and 
critical networks
Network 
segmentation 
 and differentiation
Ericsson™s customers 
 (mobile operators)
Salient 
 risks:Potential 
impacts:Impactsconnected to:
 36What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?Health concerns are often related to an incorrect perception that 5G will lead to 
higher radio wave exposure levels, due to technology such as advanced beam 
steering or higher frequency bands. As with previous mobile networks, 5G devices 
will communicate with base stations by transmitting and receiving radio waves, 
or RF EMF.
 As with the rollout of previous generations of mobile networks, some concerns are 
raised about possible health impacts from the radio waves related to 5G. Campaigns 
and protests against 5G have been held in several countries around the world, 
organized by groups claiming that 5G is not safe. Misinformation and disinformation 
are also being spread on the internet and social media about 5G health impacts. For 
example, the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic led to vandalism of base station 
sites and threats and harassment towards telecom workers in several countries, as a 
result of false conspiracy theories claiming that the virus is spread by 5G radio signals, 
or that these have a negative impact on the immune system.
 While Ericsson, the wireless industry, expert bodies such as the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and governments are confident, based on extensive research, 
that there is no established link between adverse health effects and radio waves from 
mobile communication equipment, a perception of health risks needs to be addressed. 
It is important that people have access to fact-based and correct information about 
5G and the safety of the technology, so they can formulate an educated opinion. 
 WHO states: ﬁFrom all evidence accumulated so far, no adverse short- or long-
term health effects have been shown to occur from the RF signals produced by base 
stationsﬂ and ﬁA large number of studies have been performed over the last two 
decades to assess whether mobile phones pose a potential health risk. To date, no 
adverse health effects have been established as being caused by mobile phone use.ﬂ 
(WHO fact sheets No 304 and No 193).
 Threats and violence directed towards employees in the mobile network industry, 
as a consequence of the spread of 5G disinformation, are severe human rights 
impacts that need to be prevented and addressed. Additionally, in cases of base 
station vandalism, local communities might be impacted as a result of losing access to 
essential communication services in the area.
  While the spread of misinformation needs to be prevented and criminal acts never 
accepted, people have the right to voice concerns.
There are no substantiated health effects from radio waves emitted from mobile 
phones and base stations complying with international science-based limits set with 
large safety margins. The power levels of the radio signals transmitted by 5G radio 
equipment are of similar or lower magnitude to those used in previous networks and 
the same safety standards must be met. 
 While base station site vandalism linked to 5G health concerns is likely to affect a 
small number of people, any impacts could be grave, for example resulting in impacts 
for individuals if they temporarily cannot call an ambulance due to the network being 
unavailable. The health and safety impacts on employees in the mobile network 
industry as a result of vandalism and threats can also be severe.
 While potential freedom of expression concerns connected to this impact area have 
not been substantiated, any such impacts may be severe in repressive countries.
It is typically the responsibility of mobile operators (Ericsson™s customers) to comply 
with national radio wave exposure regulations. However, Ericsson ensures that its 
radio products are designed and tested to comply with relevant RF EMF standards 
and regulations. 
 As stated above, there are no substantiated health impacts associated with the 
radio waves from mobile networks. Issues related to the health and safety of telecom 
workers, impacts on local communities due to base station vandalism and freedom of 
expression concerns can be directly linked to business relationships in the value chain. 
These issues are mainly covered in other impact areas of this report.
Perceived health risks related to 5G radio wave exposure
Table 9: Health concerns
 37What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ericsson has a responsibility to ensure that its products do not have any adverse 
health impacts. It does this by complying with safety standards and regulations 
related to RF electromagnetic field exposure, by making fact-based information 
about the safety of wireless communications available to stakeholders, and by 
supporting independent research to address any remaining gaps in knowledge 
identified by expert organizations such as WHO.
Ł In accordance with Ericsson™s Electromagnetic Fields and Health Policy, Ericsson™s 
radio products are tested in Ericsson™s EMF Research Laboratory for compliance 
with relevant EMF regulations and standards before they are delivered to the 
market. The EMF Laboratory complies with the international standard ISO/
IEC 17025 that specifies general requirements for the competence of testing 
laboratories and it is accredited by the Swedish accreditation authority SWEDAC. 
The EMF exposure levels from base stations in places where people normally reside 
are typically less than a percent of international limits, since the intensity of radio 
waves drops quickly with distance from the antenna. Base station antennas are 
installed to ensure that unauthorized people do not have access to areas where 
EMF limits may be reached.
Ł Ericsson performs research and contributes to international standardization with 
the aim of developing methods to accurately assess the radio wave exposure from 
wireless equipment, including 5G. This makes it possible to provide fact-based 
information to stakeholders.
Ł On its own, and in collaboration with wireless industry associations, Ericsson 
develops fact-based information about the 5G technology and the radio wave 
exposure from 5G that is made available to stakeholders. 
Ł Additionally, it continuously discusses the topic of 5G, EMF and health with 
external stakeholders. During the last year, Ericsson participated in more 
than 30 stakeholder meetings. It will continue to engage proactively and 
transparently with external stakeholders on this topic to ensure concerns are 
recognized and addressed.
Ł Ericsson monitors how public sentiment towards 5G and EMF is affected by 
disinformation, in continuous dialogue with mobile operators and governments, 
and assists them in efforts to educate concerned citizens. Ericsson will never 
legitimize vandalism and sabotage of mobile network infrastructure and will 
always work for the protection and safety of its equipment, workforce, 
 customers and society at large. 
Ł For more information on how Ericsson manages radio waves and health 
 click here
.Perceived health risks related to 5G radio wave exposure
 38What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility?
5G technology is likely to increase the collection of personal data of end users, 
through the use of connected devices, AI, facial recognition and the availability of 
more precise geolocation data that is generally used to improve network functionality. 
Given the increased amounts and types of personal data that will be in circulation as a 
result of 5G technology, there is potentially an increased risk of adverse impact on the 
right to privacy if such information is not protected.
 5G has enabled an explosion of connected IoT devices and services. IoT devices are 
generally less secure and new service providers may not always have the necessary 
controls in place to guarantee the protection of the personal data they handle. These 
two aspects of 5G are threats to the right to privacy and to Ericsson™s principles 
of personal data protection, in particular its principle of data minimization and 
transparent and fair processing. 
 Ericsson must consider the changing risk landscape introduced by 5G and 
implement adequate controls to mitigate these risks.
While the potential right to privacy impacts is not necessarily new to 5G, the 
likelihood of impacts occurring might increase if the risks connected to ubiquitous 
processing of personal data are not managed correctly. Privacy impacts in and of 
themselves are grave and for many individuals exposing their private information 
could lead to serious risks, such as blackmail, leading to impacts on livelihoods and 
physical threats (for example, because someone™s sexual orientation is threatened 
to be exposed in countries where the law discriminates on this basis), or personal 
information sold to private businesses (for example, leading insurance companies 
to deny healthcare coverage, or banking institutions to deny mortgages or personal 
loans), or the amalgamation of so much information about individuals that the 
potential for identity theft is significantly heightened (data abuse by governments is 
discussed in the next section). 
 Many of these impacts are also often hard or impossible to remediate (for example, 
if someone™s sexual orientation is known this cannot become unknown).
If Ericsson was processing data on behalf of a mobile operator or other business 
partner, and was responsible for loss of or misusing that data, then it would be causing 
these impacts. However, it is the operators who collect the data. Ericsson could be 
directly linked to potential impacts related to data loss or misuse through customer 
or third-party actions, if such impacts are connected to Ericsson services. If Ericsson 
neglects its responsibility to conduct due diligence into how such services or solutions 
can be misused, it can be seen to be contributing to impacts caused by third parties.
Ericsson has a responsibility to protect personal data in all its operations. It does 
this by applying strict requirements, design rules, processes, policies and standards 
and by continuously evolving these practices. Ericsson also has a responsibility to 
conduct due diligence when engaging with third parties to ensure its products or 
service offerings are not misused.
Privacy and related impacts resulting from ubiquitous processing of personal data
Table 10: Privacy, data loss and misuse
 39What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ł Ericsson has a longstanding approach to cybersecurity and privacy, the success of 
which is central to its business model and proposition. Nevertheless, ICT is a rapidly 
evolving industry and Ericsson needs to maintain a strong focus on these issues and 
the evolving risk landscape, including ubiquitous processing of personal data.
Ł Building a secure 5G network requires a holistic approach rather than a focus on 
individual technical parts in isolation. For example, interactions between user 
authentication, traffic encryption, mobility, overload situations and network 
resilience aspects need to be considered together.
Ł 5G marks the beginning of a new era of network security with the introduction of 
International Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) encryption. All traffic data which 
is sent over a 5G radio network is encrypted, integrity protected and subject to 
mutual authentication (device to network). IMSI is a unique identifiable number 
stored on each SIM card for mobile phones.
Ł For more information on how cybersecurity is built in and ensured in 5G networks 
click here
. Ł There are four main areas that address the different aspects of privacy: 
Ł Privacy in product development: Ericsson incorporates privacy by design 
 and all its products are categorized based on their privacy risk profile.
Ł Privacy in deployment and operations: Ericsson only deploys products 
 after they have undergone a privacy assessment.
Ł Standardization of privacy features: Ericsson drives privacy features in 
multiple standardization organizations, where operators, vendors and other 
stakeholders set standards for how networks around the globe will work 
together. This also includes how best to protect networks and users against 
malicious actors.
Ł Research and horizon: Ericsson conducts research, prepares insights and 
monitors regulatory impacts to drive a proactive agenda on privacy by design.
Ł For many years Ericsson has worked systematically to incorporate privacy 
considerations into all phases of product development using its internal 
framework, the Security Reliability Model (SRM). Through the model, it 
manages risks when developing software and hardware technologies and 
ensures compliance to regulatory demands such as GDPR. Ericsson is present in 
all the major standardization organizations working for security and privacy 
 in mobile communication networks. A few of these are mentioned on page 13. 
 It continuously shapes the industry by driving standardization of privacy-
enhancing technologies, striving for globally agreed solutions in the mobile 
networks. For example, Ericsson was one of the main advocates and drivers in 
3GPP for protecting 5G against IMSI catchers 
 Œ a telephone eavesdropping 
device used for intercepting mobile phone traffic and tracking location data of 
mobile phone users, essentially a ﬁfakeﬁ cell tower acting between the target 
mobile phone and the service provider's real towers. 
Ł Ericsson also considers privacy risks through its Sensitive Business framework, 
which evaluates human rights risks in its sales opportunities. While no specific new 
privacy risks are foreseen related to 5G, existing risks can be heightened. Ericsson 
continues to monitor such risks and acts proactively when needed. Actions can 
take the form of developing new use cases and conditions for approval of business 
opportunities, re-evaluating product risks and implementing new mitigations, 
 as well as raising issues with business partners and external stakeholders. 
Ł Ericsson has an important role to play in relation to mobile operators, to ensure 
that the potential for misuse of the technology is minimized. With some operators 
this will be fairly easy, as they share the same commitments and values as 
Ericsson. With others it will be much more difficult and a more step-by-step 
approach will be needed. It will be important to refine and evolve a differentiated 
strategy to address the diversity that its customers hold in terms of values and 
commitment to the protection of personal data. Such a strategy also needs to 
include awareness raising and capacity building. 
Ł More generally, Ericsson should continue working with mobile operators, peers, 
other business partners, governments and NGOs to develop strategies to prevent 
data losses and abuses related to rollout of 5G.
Privacy and related impacts resulting from ubiquitous processing of personal data
 40What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s  responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
5G is expected to play a crucial role in facilitating critical infrastructure (such as water 
and power utilities), health systems (remote surgery, ambulances, home monitoring 
devices), security provision (police, military) and economic activity. Where these 
services and their beneficiaries rely on 5G networks and they would fail 
 (including as a result of a cyber attack) people may be severely impacted. 
Because of the critical nature of the services, impacts could be grave where it 
concerns life, health and security. In addition, livelihoods may be at stake where 
critical infrastructure fails for a longer period of time and insecurity is introduced into 
otherwise reliable systems. The potential to impact vast amounts of people through 
networks makes the scope potentially large Œ even where the likelihood (of say a 
power failure) would be small, this still poses severe risks to people™s rights that 
 need to be carefully managed.
Ericsson designs and delivers the networks and, in some cases, manages the 
networks. While failures of critical networks due to cyber attacks are caused by 
 a third party, Ericsson™s involvement will depend, among other factors, on the 
robustness of measures taken to prevent such attacks. If such measures are 
 robust and in line with industry best practice and impacts nevertheless happen, 
Ericsson may be seen to be directly linked to potential impacts (rather than 
contributing to such impacts).
Ericsson has a responsibility to proactively identify risks to critical networks, mitigate 
risks where possible and work with its business partners to inform those most at risk. 
Where rollout of 5G increases those risks or their exposure, especially where Ericsson 
is actively developing and promoting new products and functionalities that come 
with increased risks, then Ericsson should take additional steps to inform potentially 
affected stakeholders and work with its customers to prevent and mitigate risks to 
the greatest extent possible, with a specific focus on those people who would be most 
vulnerable to network failures.
 It is important to note that cybersecurity is a topic that requires engagement from 
a wide range of industry stakeholders. Ensuring network security is a combined 
effort through security standardizations, vendor security processes and operational 
security, which is the responsibility of mobile operators. Mobile networks often have 
a multi-vendor setup, meaning that a network consists of products from different 
vendors. Ericsson needs to take responsibility for its products, services and operations. 
However, network failures can happen due to circumstances beyond Ericsson™s 
responsibility. External factors such as earthquakes or power outages can also cause 
network failures, not only deliberate attacks. These risks also need to be addressed.
Ł Ericsson proactively identifies vulnerabilities, clearly communicates them to its 
customers and works together with customers to mitigate any unacceptable risks. 
Ł Ericsson™s SRM addresses security and privacy risks across its portfolio, including 
the whole life cycle and end-to-end from sourcing to support.
Ł In addition to Ericsson SRM and connected processes, Ericsson has a dedicated 
Product Security Incident Response Team, which makes sure that it is effectively 
able to respond and support customers in case of security incidents involving 
Ericsson™s portfolio. 
Ericsson PSIRT constantly monitors the security landscape
 and takes both proactive and reactive measures when necessary.
Ł Ericsson actively contributes to building knowledge and raising awareness on 
the topic of security of mobile networks by publishing white papers and articles 
and engaging in the development of standards and frameworks, for example the 
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA) 5G Security Toolbox.
Ł For more information on how Ericsson proactively identifies vulnerabilities 
 click here
.People relying on critical networks may be impacted due to network failures
Table 11: Security and critical networks
 41Table 12: Network segmentation and differentiation
What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?Through network slicing, 5G will to a larger extent enable companies to have their 
own private network to run and operate their businesses. Indeed, networks are 
already being built to support mining operations and automotive manufacturing, 
among other industries. 5G, often combined with other technologies such as AI, 
becomes a more integral part of running such businesses, which makes the networks 
more closely linked to potential adverse impacts that these business relationships 
may be involved with. 
 This could involve a range of impacts, for example workers being laid off 
because robots replace their work, enabling automated vehicles that can cause 
safety accidents, or sophisticated security technology (supported by 5G) that could 
come with risks for workers and nearby communities. 
 A subset of issues could arise in relation to features of a private network, such 
as whether it could be used to hide criminal and human rights abusing activity, 
or, conversely, that certain capabilities of monitoring and content control (by 
employers) might infringe on privacy rights or freedom of information and 
expression rights of employees.
Not all of the impacts to which Ericsson and its mobile operator customers could 
be connected to via businesses running private networks will necessarily become 
severe. However, there could be cases where grave human rights impacts are 
facilitated by private networks, for example in the case of security operations, 
 or the impacts a mining operation has on local communities. 
 While initially the rollout of private networks through 5G may be limited, 
over time this could become a significant part of the business, for example 
when many companies would have their own private network. Thus, this may 
also become a severe human rights risk due to the number of people that could 
potentially be affected. 
The connection to Ericsson depends on the extent the setup and support of a private 
network is directly linked to specific adverse human rights impacts. Simply providing 
services to a business entity that is involved in adverse impacts does not necessarily 
result in a situation where Ericsson™s services are linked to those impacts. 
  However, if the private network facilitates such impacts Œ for example, impacts on 
communities by mining companies using specific 5G functionality or accidents with 
self-driving cars that use a 5G network to navigate the road Œ then Ericsson™s services 
would be involved with the impact (either through contribution or linkage).
 Where functionality of private networks goes beyond general communications and 
instead provides a functionality that specifically leads to a human rights harm and 
adequate due diligence is not conducted, Ericsson™s products and services could be 
seen to be contributing to such impacts.
 Ericsson™s approach to these types of business engagements is to work together 
with mobile operators to market and roll out its products and services, as well as 
prevent and mitigate any adverse impacts. It will be Ericsson™s products and services 
that provide the technology, and, in some instances, Ericsson might manage 
the networks on behalf of the operator. There is therefore a clear connection to 
Ericsson™s operations.
 Additionally, many of the same questions that arise in relation to governments™ 
access to and surveillance of networks (see following section) are likely to come up in 
relation to this business area. 
Human rights abuses by companies that rely on private networks to operate
 42What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
While the challenges laid out here are not unique to 5G, the expected application 
of network slicing enhanced by 5G will allow more targeted and specific product 
and service offerings to companies. This requires Ericsson and its mobile operator 
partners to conduct much of the same type of due diligence process as is in place 
for other customers, including assessing sales transactions for the potential of 
human rights abuses and the need to build and apply leverage in relation to these 
companies, together with the mobile operator and other parties, in order to prevent 
and address human rights abuses connected to the segmented networks.
Ł To some extent these risks are identified and addressed through the Ericsson 
Sensitive Business framework. However, there is a need to expand this approach to 
ensure risks are captured proactively and consistently, given that the rollout of 5G 
will likely increase the offering of private networks.
Ł There could be a need for additional sector-specific risk analysis and guidelines 
for sectors where these setups will be rolled out first Œ likely healthcare, retail, 
automotive, smart manufacturing and mining. Where possible, such analysis could 
be done in collaboration with mobile operators. 
Ł Furthermore, specific privacy and freedom of expression risks in relation to 
corporate networks (intranets) need to be considered and incorporated in design, 
sales and rollout of such private networks.
Human rights abuses by companies that rely on private networks to operate
 43Table 13: Network segmentation and differentiation
What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Net neutrality is the principle that all users have the same right to access and 
distribute information, and run services and applications of their choosing, on the 
internet. 5G is designed to increase and improve communication capabilities for a 
wide range of different uses, each with their own network capacity requirements. 
Mission-critical real-time services, such as road safety applications, demand one type 
of network characteristic. 
 Massive IoT services, connecting large numbers of devices for services that are not 
time critical, demand another. Network slicing is a way of creating different ﬁvirtual 
networksﬂ using the same infrastructure, which allows these virtual networks to 
be tailored to their services™ capacity needs and adjusted according to user/traffic 
demand. While network slicing is not a new feature, its use will increase in 5G 
networks. Such functionality alone does not impact net neutrality, but it is possible to 
misuse the technology for other purposes.
The concerns related to net neutrality are that the increased possibilities of network 
slicing in 5G networks can be used to differentiate offerings in a way that severely 
impacts the ability of users to fully utilize certain services. This can include hampering 
their ability to access online education platforms, basic and/or critical information 
and services (such as doctor appointments), or effectively do their job remotely. The 
importance of these scenarios has been brought sharply into focus during 2020 with 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Human rights, such as the rights to education, health, non-
discrimination, just and favorable conditions of work and an adequate standard of 
living, could be harmed in these circumstances.
Where Ericsson provides networks with segmentation capability that is misused in a 
way that impacts people, its products and services could be linked to the human rights 
impacts previously outlined. The nature of the company™s involvement changes in the 
event that Ericsson does not take action to minimize impacts or influence the extent 
to which network segmentation by a customer could lead to a poor quality of network 
or inability to access the internet by some end users.
Given that net neutrality and how it impacts human rights is a complex dynamic and 
may vary considerably depending on context, it is important that Ericsson engages 
with relevant stakeholders to ensure the principles of net neutrality (the equal access 
to information and services) are protected through effective legislation. Ericsson also 
has a responsibility to ensure its products and solutions are not misused and to use its 
leverage with customers to prevent harm.
Ł Ericsson supports an open internet that allows end users to access the content, 
applications and services they want, while enabling continued investment, 
customization and innovation in the services they need. It does this by engaging in 
the development of regulatory requirements to protect equal access for end users; 
for example, the EU Open Internet Regulation. It is important to note that regulation 
protecting net neutrality should focus on ensuring that all users get equal access to 
content and services, but avoid provisions requiring that all individual packets of 
data must be treated the same. Such requirements would prevent some of the crucial 
functionality of 5G networks, such as tailoring the network specifications so that each 
service can get a virtual network to suit its individual needs. For example, a mobile 
network on a train needs to manage sophisticated cybersecurity protections and 
allow travelers to stream video. Network slicing ensures that these functionalities can 
be managed effectively through the same network.
Ł Ericsson will continue to engage on this topic to promote and develop effective 
legal standards to ensure equal access to information, services and applications. It 
believes the EU, through the Open Internet Regulation, has taken the right approach 
to address this issue.
Ł Ericsson is additionally engaged in standardization bodies where network slicing is 
defined. The aim is to achieve a transparent definition of slicing technology, which 
guarantees harmonization and global alignment of technology standards and 
industry initiatives. This in turn facilitates a better understanding of the technology 
among regulators, ensuring concerns are addressed and rights protected through 
effective legislation.
Net neutrality concerns resulting from network segmentation
 44Ericsson™s involvement 
 with governments
Government 
surveillance and 
extraction of 
information by 
authorities for 
harmful purposesNetwork 
shutdowns 
targeting specific 
groups of people 
or institutions
Government 
authorities using networks to 
facilitate human 
rights abuses
Network 
surveillance
Network 
shutdowns
Network 
segmentation 
 and differentiation
Ericsson™s 
involvement 
 with governments
Salient 
 risks:Potential 
impacts:Impactsconnected to:
 45Table 14: Network surveillance
What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?As discussed earlier in this report, and spurred by 5G technology, companies will 
increasingly generate a huge amount of personal identifiable information, which 
government authorities might want to access. 5G is also likely over time to enable 
more precise surveillance by processing larger amounts and new types of data 
sets. While such efforts by many governments may be developed in the context of 
legitimate purposes such as crime prevention, emergency response and countering 
terrorism, the existence of such vast amounts of data makes it prone to abuse. This 
would impact the right to privacy and, depending on the context in which that right is 
violated, other impacts such as discrimination, arbitrary arrest, infringements on free 
press, organization, elections and so on. 
While these risks are not new to 5G, the vast amounts of user data that will further 
exponentially increase with the rollout of 5G is likely to create substantial privacy, 
and other related risks, for large numbers of people. This is a particular concern in 
countries with repressive and authoritarian regimes, or where there are weak privacy 
laws and/or enforcement of such laws.
Networks provided by Ericsson contain and will contain personal identifiable 
information that authorities may wish to access. For example, location capabilities 
and call logs are basic functionalities and information in mobile networks that enable 
communication in the first place. Being able to locate devices is necessary in order to 
connect calls and optimize network performance, while call logs are used for charging 
and billing. Through the provision of network products and services, Ericsson enables 
users to channel private information over networks that could then be captured by 
government entities interested in that private information. Ericsson does not develop 
surveillance technology. However, it does enable lawful interception (LI) functionality 
in its networks. LI is a regulatory requirement in virtually every jurisdiction. A mobile 
operator must have an LI function in the network to be allowed to run a public 
telecom network. For Ericsson this means that if it cannot provide LI functionality, it is 
disqualified as a supplier of network equipment. 
 The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) specifies a 
reference architecture and the information that should be intercepted and supplied 
to a law enforcement agency. Ericsson™s implementation of the ETSI specification 
consists of 1. Interception Management System LI-IMS and 2. LI functionality in 
network elements. The LI-IMS is the gateway between the operator and agency 
domains and implements the LI administration function and the mediation functions. 
Ericsson only provides products for the operator, not the state authority or agencies 
such as monitoring centers.
 While Ericsson, as a vendor, does not interact directly with government authorities 
requesting this type of information (such requests are directed to mobile operators), 
the gathering and sharing of such information is nevertheless enabled through 
functionalities in the network itself. Ericsson also in some cases manages networks 
for mobile operator customers. In these cases, it is still the mobile operator that 
receives the actual request from the government. Ericsson will then execute the 
request based on information provided by the mobile operator. Ericsson could 
potentially contribute, or be directly linked to, impacts as a result of misuse of its 
technology, which will in part depend on the quality of due diligence measures taken 
to identify and mitigate such risks. 
 Additionally, in many countries, governments have the capability to directly access 
networks and extract information without the knowledge of either the operator or 
Ericsson. In these scenarios Ericsson could be directly linked to such impacts, and 
where it does not take reasonable steps to mitigate against the risks, it could also be 
seen to be contributing.
Government surveillance and extraction of information by authorities for harmful purposes
 46What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
Given the variety of ways in which Ericsson could be connected to these impacts, it 
has a responsibility to consider the various scenarios and the type of responses that 
would be needed to prevent and mitigate human rights risks. It should also consider 
potentially vulnerable groups such as journalists, human rights defenders, political 
opponents and ethnic minorities, that might be specifically targeted by government 
surveillance efforts.
1. Ericsson has a responsibility to consider what it can do in product design and 
 delivery to avoid misuse of data extraction capabilities and consider the extent to 
  which 5G makes it more (or less) likely that this would occur. 
2. Ericsson has a responsibility to consider how it can avoid third parties, including 
 governments, gaining access and extracting data from end users, including 
  
 through hacking and wiretapping.
3. Where Ericsson is involved in the activity, potentially infringing on privacy and 
 other rights (for instance when managing networks for customers and requests 
 from a mobile operator), it has a responsibility to have clear conditions and 
 guidance for when such activity may take place, and escalation pathways for its 
 employees (and contract workers conducting the same activities) when such 
  requests are made, including due consideration for the safety and security of all staff.
4. Where customers or other third parties receive government requests or orders for 
 extraction and sharing of private data, Ericsson has a responsibility to consider 
 the risk of abuse in the sales process and implement safeguards to minimize 
 human rights impacts and exert leverage, including contractual agreements, 
 capacity building and influencing government policy to incorporate respect for 
 human rights.
Government surveillance and extraction of information by authorities for harmful purposes
 47What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ł As mentioned under impact areas in the ﬁWhat is 5G?ﬂ section (page 39), Ericsson 
has well-established processes to build in privacy by design in product development. 
Product risks are also evaluated through the Sensitive Business process.
Ł See the ﬁWhat is 5G?ﬂ section (page 40) on how Ericsson is managing cybersecurity 
risks in its networks and in the rollout of 5G.
Ł Ericsson™s Sensitive Business framework specifically considers risks to privacy 
and freedom of expression in relation to sales engagements, including where 
data misuse may be a risk. The process aims to ensure that business opportunities 
and engagements are conducted in accordance with international human rights 
standards. When risks are identified in a sales opportunity through the process, 
the Market Area must submit an approval request. Submissions are evaluated 
according to four risk parameters (product risk, country risk, customer risk and 
purpose risk) and may be approved, approved with conditions or rejected. 
Conditional approvals include technical and/or contractual mitigations and its 
implementation is monitored to ensure adherence.
Ł In relation to government surveillance and privacy, Ericsson has developed 
approved use cases and end-user agreements that are contractually binding, 
specifying for what purpose the customer is allowed to access certain personally 
identifiable information. Any actions outside of the approved use cases constitute 
a breach of contract. With the deployment of 5G, new use cases might need to be 
developed. A process to identify potential gaps or additional requirements has 
been initiated. The current use cases applied by Ericsson have developed over 
time, based on learnings from previous engagements and internal evaluations. 
Additionally, the effectiveness of potentially new 5G use cases will take time to 
fully evaluate.
Ł Ericsson only supplies LI interfaces that are approved by international standards. 
In order to mitigate misuse of this technology, access to the LI system is controlled 
by multi-factor authentication, login credentials and certificates. Data integrity 
and completeness is secured by encryption and digitally signed data. All activities 
in the LI system are also logged to ensure traceability and accountability. When 
there is an alleged misuse case such record-keeping can prove how the LI system 
was used and for what purpose. Furthermore, the LI solution is designed to 
intercept a fraction of the users and traffic in the network, effectively preventing 
mass surveillance.
Ł Ericsson is continuously evaluating its procedures relating to LI, including when 
it manages a network on behalf of a mobile operator, to further strengthen the 
safeguards protecting against intended misuse of LI functionality.
Ł Where governments have direct access to networks (this can be done in many 
different ways, for example probes installed in the network, physical routing of 
cables through government facilities, or mandating that mobile operators accept 
government officials™ access to certain facilities and computer programs, so they 
can monitor and/or extract user data at will) it is challenging for mobile operators 
or vendors to prevent such access because the companies are taken out of the loop. 
Information on direct access capabilities of governments is also not usually easily 
accessible, because it is a question tied to national security. Laws enabling such 
government access are often vague or overly broad. 
Ł As a member of the Global Network Initiative, a multi-stakeholder initiative 
promoting the right to privacy and freedom of expression in the ICT industry, 
Ericsson has a collective role to play in raising awareness about direct access setups 
and laws that enable governments to access networks directly. Governments have 
a duty to make sure safeguards and access to effective remedy are implemented 
and accessible to users. The industry can use its collective leverage to influence 
governments to implement such safeguards. Currently Ericsson is working with 
other GNI members to better understand direct access setups and how human 
rights can be protected.
Ł Ericsson has also initiated dialogue with civil society organizations on 
potential collaboration to raise awareness on technology misuse among 
human rights defenders.
Government surveillance and extraction of information by authorities for harmful purposes
 48Table 15: Network shutdowns
What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
The possibility of shutting down a network is not new to 5G. But, as the networks 
become more sophisticated, and through the proliferation of private networks, 
there is potential for more discrete and granular ways to shut down parts of 
networks (or lower data transmission speeds), enabling governments to target 
specific groups, for example: 
Ł a geographic location with an ethnic minority or where many of the 
governments™ opponents are based 
Ł shutting down specific buildings (such as those of the opposition party) 
Ł cutting off or slowing down the network for citizens, while private government 
and company networks continue operating 
As communities and societies increasingly rely on mobile networks for critical 
services (such as first responder services and utilities) this could provide 
repressive governments with a very powerful tool to suppress opposition and 
manipulate populations.
Network shutdowns could potentially affect large groups of people and lead to 
grave impacts, such as infringements on the rights to freedom of expression and 
organization, privacy, access to essential services (and therefore life, health, 
security and livelihoods), non-discrimination and indigenous communities™ rights. 
Additionally, if protests against new technology take place in countries with 
repressive regimes, there is a potential risk of suppression, which may result in 
impacts on the right to freedom of expression.
All networks, including those provided by Ericsson, commonly have a feature to shut 
them down, and there is no specific technology involved in enabling a shutdown. 
Shutdowns can in some cases be necessary for public safety reasons, for example 
preventing crimes or terrorist attacks. Government requests to shut down a network are 
directed at mobile operators. Ericsson is therefore generally directly linked to potential 
impacts as a result of a shutdown. 
 When Ericsson is providing Managed Services to customers it is still the mobile 
operator who receives the request from the government, but this request is then acted 
upon by Ericsson personnel. In such situations Ericsson might be contributing if it has no 
systems in place to check and question the request, and it did not raise the issue with the 
mobile operator in contract negotiations. Of course, mobile operators and governments 
are also likely to be contributing to impacts in such cases.
Ericsson has a responsibility to consider these risks in the design and rollout of the 
networks and prevent and mitigate impacts. In particular, it needs to be attentive to 
whom and how it markets network segmentation and targeted shutdowns as a useful 
product feature for governments to adopt as part of the 5G rollout.
 Where its own staff may be at risk of receiving requests to shut down networks, as 
part of a managed services agreement, Ericsson has a responsibility to ensure that 
all requests are legitimate and ensure the service provider can provide the proper 
documentation from government authorities to demonstrate that all legally required 
procedures have been followed. In cases when requests are not legitimate, Ericsson 
has a responsibility to raise the issue with the customer and build leverage into 
contracts to be able to do so.
Network shutdowns targeting specific groups of people or institutions
 49What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
The potentially more discrete and granular capabilities of shutting down mobile 
networks as a result of more sophisticated 5G technology needs to be closely 
monitored. It is still too early to say to what extent this risk will materialize. However, 
 Ericsson will ensure these issues are included in its due diligence processes and 
proactively engage with mobile operators to discuss how this risk could materialize 
based on their experiences, in order to find joint ways of approaching this risk.
 Ericsson is continuously evaluating its procedures relating to how it manages 
a network on behalf of a mobile operator, to further strengthen the safeguards 
protecting against intended or unexpected impacts connected to network shutdowns.
 If protests relating to new technology, linked to Ericsson, do emerge in repressive 
countries, Ericsson needs to be aware of the situation and address it through due 
diligence measures. It should work in collaboration with mobile operators and other 
partners and stakeholders to build leverage with governments and engage them on 
approaches to obtain buy-in from citizens.
 The GNI is actively engaged in raising awareness on government-mandated 
shutdowns globally and advocating for lifting such shutdowns when they are clearly 
in violation of human rights. To increase collective leverage, Ericsson will continue 
to engage on this issue through the GNI and gather information in order to more 
clearly understand if and how 5G technologies will provide governments with more 
sophisticated tools to shut down networks.
Network shutdowns targeting specific groups of people or institutions
 50Table 16: Network segmentation and differentiation
What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
As is the case with private enterprises, government authorities are increasingly 
using private mission-critical networks for internal communications. It could 
be a dedicated network for emergency response services, but also a police 
department or security services which may be involved in human rights abuses 
organized through network communications, such as by coordinating operations. 
Additionally, military actors are increasingly looking to utilize 5G technology (and 
coming generations) for a wide range of use cases.
Human rights abuses relating to police and security services are often of a grave and 
irremediable nature such as loss of life or severe injuries. Many other severe impacts 
may be involved, as well as loss of livelihoods, gender-related violence and impacts 
on children and other vulnerable individuals.
Ericsson™s connection to potential abuse perpetrated by government authorities 
through private networks will largely depend on the extent to which the abuse was 
enabled through the use of the network and the due diligence measure it took in order 
to mitigate risks of such impacts. 5G will likely make private networks and services 
more widespread among governments. Ericsson™s approach to these types of business 
engagements is to work together with mobile operators, not supplying government 
entities directly.
 Challenging scenarios are also likely to occur, such as where Ericsson may be involved 
in providing network services for emergency response services, including police 
authorities. While mobile communication and connectivity is a crucial part of providing 
emergency response services, police forces can also be involved in human rights abuse.
Ericsson has a responsibility to ensure its networks are not used to facilitate human 
rights abuse. The fact that it supplies government entities through a mobile operator 
customer does not diminish that responsibility. Ericsson needs to identify, prevent and 
mitigate risks related to such government customers. 
 As Ericsson further assesses its responsibility under the UN Guiding Principles for 
specific transactions and relationships, it will seek clarity on its responsibilities and 
the type of action it can and should take.
Ł To date, the Ericsson Sensitive Business framework has primarily focused on 
freedom of expression and privacy risks. However, Ericsson is in the process 
of evaluating how broader human rights risks in relation to government end 
users should be addressed. It already considers the human rights track record of 
government customers and will formalize this approach.
Ł Ericsson is also in the process of including a conflict sensitivity perspective in its 
sales process, to proactively identify business engagements in conflict-affected 
areas and implement appropriate mitigating measures.
Ł In collaboration with mobile operator customers, Ericsson is also developing 
offerings that take into consideration ways in which its products and services might 
facilitate human rights abuse by government end users, and work with mobile 
operators to develop joint tools to prevent and mitigate these risks.
Government authorities using private networks to facilitate human rights abuses
 5G technology could contribute to 
 socio-economic inequality between 
 and within countries
Ethical challenges presented by AI and 
machine learning, specifically with respect 
to trustworthiness, human oversight, bias 
and transparency
Societal 
 impactsTrustworthy AI
Broader 
 societySalient 
 risks:Potential 
impacts:Impactsconnected to:
51Ericsson™s broader 
 societal impacts
 52Table 17: Socio-economic inequality
What is the impact?Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
 with the impact?What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
A digital divide already exists, with more than 40 percent of the world™s population 
lacking internet access. While Ericsson forecasts that 90 percent of the global 
population will be covered by 4G networks by 2026, the same estimate for 5G is 
 40 percent by 2026.¹¹ The COVID-19 pandemic clearly shows that inequalities in 
access to connectivity affect access to education, healthcare and livelihoods. There 
is also evidence that mobile broadband penetration contributes to Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) growth. A joint research project between Ericsson and Imperial College 
in London shows that, on average, a 10 percent increase in the mobile broadband 
adoption ratio causes a 0.8 percent increase in GDP.¹² 5G is being rolled out with 
different speeds across regions and within countries. 
 With all of the potential economic, social and cultural benefits 5G will bring, 
such developments, if rolled out unequally, can also further create and exacerbate 
inequalities between developed and less developed countries and between urban and 
rural communities within countries. This can lead to potential impacts on livelihoods 
and further drive inequalities. 
 Additionally, some governments may use the rollout of 5G as a political tool, 
benefiting their preferred groups over others.
While generally the impacts are quite unpredictable, the issue of digital divides almost 
by definition affects large groups of people and is therefore potentially widespread. A 
wide range of human rights (such as rights to health, education and livelihoods) can 
potentially be affected by an uneven rollout, increasing the scope of the impacts.
Addressing the digital divide and mitigating risks related to an uneven rollout of 5G 
networks is an issue connected to the whole ICT ecosystem. As a network vendor, 
Ericsson is closely involved in how networks are rolled out and is one of the main 
actors in the ecosystem that has a role to play. Ericsson may be inadvertently 
contributing to this issue if it is not appropriately managed.
Ericsson has a responsibility to proactively drive the issue of bridging the digital 
divide. While it is not its intent to drive impacts relating to creating digital divides, it 
is connected to the impacts its networks create. Ericsson cannot, however, address 
these risks on its own, but must work with customers, industry peers and governments 
to ensure that the ICT industry is conscious of these issues, recognizing them in 
business strategies and engagement with stakeholders, and identifying any egregious 
forms, for example when a government is deliberately disadvantaging a particular 
ethnic minority in rolling out the benefits of 5G. While such forms of deliberate 
impacts will be difficult to assess, and primarily linked to spectrum allocation and 
licensing, Ericsson needs to be aware of the risk and continuously engage relevant 
stakeholders to identify red flags.
Ł As previously stated, these types of broader societal impacts (contributing to 
changing demand for particular types of labor is an additional impact) are not 
an issue that Ericsson can solve on its own. It has been addressing the issue of 
digital inclusion for many years through a wide range of programs, collaborations 
and initiatives.
Ł While improving capacity and extending coverage is a priority, this does not totally 
address the problem of digital inclusion. The internet must also be accessible, 
affordable and ready for use by all. Driving digital inclusion goes beyond the 
provision of network coverage, with accessibility and affordability as key barriers 
for potential users.
5G technology could contribute to socio-economic inequality between and within countries
 Ericsson Mobility Report (January 2019)
 and Ericsson Mobility Report (November 2020)
 Boosting GDP through mobile broadband
 53What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ł Through its work in forums such as the Broadband Commission for Sustainable 
Development, the World Economic Forum, the Alliance for Affordable Internet 
and the Smart Africa Alliance, Ericsson aims to ensure that the benefits of 
broadband, which underpin achievement of the Sustainable Development 
Goals, are affordable and accessible to all. In these forums Ericsson advocates 
efforts such as spectrum policies and international investments, as well as 
progress towards connecting the unconnected and exploring multi-stakeholder 
business initiatives to bridge the digital divide. Ericsson is also engaged in 
capacity development with partners including the Swedish International 
Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) and SPIDER, one of the programs 
focusing on capacity building so that populations will have access to good 
quality and secure telephony and broadband services and communications.
Ł Ericsson is relaunching its strategy on Digital Inclusion, involving institutional 
capacity building, digital literacy and universal and affordable internet access 
through mobile broadband. A detailed scope, desired outcome and strategy will 
be developed during 2021.  
Ł Connect to Learn is Ericsson™s flagship education program. Its purpose is to 
empower teachers, students and schools through ICT solutions to deliver a 
quality 21st century education, as well as providing young people worldwide 
with digital skills to prepare them for a 5G future.
Ł In 2020, Ericsson and UNICEF launched a global partnership to map school 
internet connectivity. The three-year initiative to identify connectivity gaps in 
 35 countries is a critical first step in connecting every school to the internet. 
This joint effort is part of the Giga initiative. Launched last year and led by 
UNICEF and the ITU, Giga aims to connect every school to the internet. In 
addition to funding, Ericsson will commit resources for data engineering and 
data science capacity to accelerate school connectivity mapping. Specifically, 
Ericsson will assist with the collection, validation, analysis, monitoring and 
visual representation of real-time school connectivity data. The data generated 
through the mapping will enable governments and the private sector to design 
and deploy digital solutions that enable learning for children and young people. 
Ericsson will also engage its extensive customer base to further advance the 
goals of the Giga initiative.
Ł Ericsson partners with UNESCO on an AI literacy program, teaching AI skills 
to children from kindergarten to grade 12. The centerpiece of the solution 
is the Teaching AI for K-12 portal that is a free resource, accessible globally 
for teachers and curriculum developers to help them in their efforts to create 
new learning programs for K-12 students on the subject of AI. In addition, 
independently from UNESCO, Ericsson provides AI introductory courses targeting 
children and young adults (11 to 25 years old). It is currently in discussions with 
universities to develop advanced AI courses for university students.
Ł For more information on Ericsson™s efforts to bridge the digital divide and 
 provide connectivity for all, read its 
Technology for Good Impact Report
.Ł While Ericsson has not seen any examples of governments using the rollout 
of 5G networks as a political tool, benefiting preferred groups over others, 
this is an issue that needs to be monitored in close dialogue with its mobile 
operator customers, to ensure it does not inadvertently contribute to such 
political agendas.Ł In relation to 5G specifically, Ericsson needs to ensure it not only considers 
digital divides between more and less developed countries, but equally considers 
divides within countries between urban and rural areas Œ not only focusing on 
smart cities, but also on clever countrysides (the future connectivity needs of 
rural areas). Connectivity challenges and needs are very different in urban and 
rural areas Œ rather than issues such as smart transportation and parking, in 
rural areas use cases are about connected farms or remote surgery. The rollout 
of 5G networks in urban and rural areas must reflect the different needs of such 
communities. In order to address these needs close collaboration with customers 
and governments is necessary, as well as active engagement with local 
communities to ensure their 
needs and concerns are addressed.
5G technology could contribute to socio-economic inequality between and within countries
 54Table 18: Socio-economic inequality
What is the impact?Why is it severe?
AI and ML, powered by 5G technology, has in a relatively short space of time 
successfully automated routine tasks and enabled more efficient networks, 
while enhancing human capacity with new knowledge. It has the potential to 
enable greater innovations, that could solve some of the most difficult societal, 
environmental and economic concerns. As a result, AI is likely to bring about sweeping 
changes in businesses and in the ways people work and live in the years ahead. 
 The total impact of these changes is still to be discovered, and there is potential risk 
for intentional adversarial misuse, which Ericsson aims to mitigate as far as possible, 
through security and privacy design. But previous experiences have revealed that 
some unforeseen outcomes could also result in negative unintentional side effects. 
This could include the exposure of users™ personal data, unfair judgements through 
opaque automated decision making, or just the uncertainty of where accountability 
lies in the event of an autonomous system malfunction. 
 This technological revolution is likely to bring significant people-related disruption 
in its trail, leading to calls from within and outside the technology community to 
regulate the development of AI, or at the very least provide a global framework that 
establishes the key principles of ethical and trustworthy AI.
Ericsson mainly develops and uses AI solutions to run more efficient networks. 
Examples of use cases are AI-powered support services Œ which can isolate faults 
more accurately in the 5G network to remedy issues correctly and quickly Œ or using 
AI algorithms to predict traffic patterns and autonomously turn off antennas as 
required to reduce energy usage.
 While such use cases generally have a positive impact on people and the 
environment, there needs to be awareness of the impact that AI-enabled systems 
might have while being implemented in different contexts. AI systems also 
need to be programmed to act responsibly and fairly within their boundaries for 
trustworthy outcomes.
 There are several challenges with the potential of AI technologies and possible 
unintended effects. These include:
Ł Transparency and explainability: If AI systems are opaque and unable to explain 
how or why certain results are presented, this lack of transparency will undermine 
trust in the system. In which ways can autonomous systems explain themselves?
Ł Security and privacy: Access to vast amounts of data will enable AI systems to 
identify patterns beyond human capabilities. This creates a risk that the privacy 
of individuals could be breached. There is even the risk that our innermost private 
thoughts could be accessed and (unknowingly) influenced, potentially impacting 
people™s right to freedom of thought. How can we as individuals secure and 
comprehend the use of data derived from our activities online or in real life?
Ł Personal and public safety: Deploying autonomous systems (self-driving cars, 
UAVs or robotics) across public or industrial arenas could pose a risk of harm. How 
can we ensure human safety?
Ł Bias and discrimination: Even if technology is neutral, it will only do what we 
program (and teach) it to do. It will therefore be influenced by human and cognitive 
bias, or skewed, incomplete learning data sets. How do we make sure that the use 
of AI systems does not discriminate in unintended ways?
Ł Automation and human control: Trust in systems that both support and offload 
current work tasks have the risk of undermining our knowledge of those skills. This 
will make it more difficult to judge the correctness and outcome of these systems 
and, in the end, make it impossible for human interception. How can we ensure 
human control of AI systems?
Ł Accountability and regulation: With the introduction of new AI-driven systems, 
expectations on responsibility and accountability will increase. Who is responsible 
for the use and potential misuse of AI systems?
Ethical challenges presented by AI and ML, specifically trustworthiness, human oversight, bias and transparency
 55Why is it severe?
How is Ericsson involved 
with the impact?What is Ericsson™s responsibility?
These challenges have the potential to impact large groups of the population through 
5G networks, if left unaddressed. Additionally, a wide range of human rights are 
potentially impacted by intentional or unintentional misuse of AI solutions.
 Big data analytics and AI increasingly enable states and business enterprises to 
obtain fine-grained information about people™s lives, make inferences about their 
physical and mental characteristics and create detailed personality profiles.
 An increasingly complex web of commercial organizations within a broad data 
ecosystem is collecting this granular information in order to make inferences about 
what people think, feel, want and ultimately how they will act, in order to monetize 
this data. One of the main problems with this data collection is that it often happens 
without the data owner™s/rights-holder™s knowledge or consent, and thus without any 
awareness of, or control over, the myriad ways in which their personal data could be 
used. The number of people potentially impacted by this range of important issues 
could be extremely high, involving anyone with a technology device.

amounts of data. AI provides the tools to make sense of the data, which can be used 
to reduce the complexity of the system by automation, optimize the network for 
performance and efficiency and to introduce new business innovations. Ericsson, as 
a provider of the advanced infrastructure and connected AI solutions, plays a pivotal 
role, even though most of the potential pitfalls and challenges of using AI are not 
connected to AI solutions specifically developed for the telecom industry. 
 However, Ericsson could be directly linked to impacts as a result of a wider range 
of AI solutions deployed in connection to 5G networks; for example, if government 
authorities use AI solutions in combination with speech recognition to almost 
instantly process intercepted calls. While Ericsson does not develop this type of 
AI solution, it needs to consider the risk of enabling such misuse in 5G networks. If 
Ericsson fails to take sufficient actions to prevent such abuse by third parties, it could 
be seen to be contributing to the impacts.
As one of the key enablers of AI solutions, Ericsson is an important stakeholder in 
ensuring trustworthiness of AI applications and a key voice to engage with industry 
peers and governmental stakeholders on this topic. It has a responsibility to consider 
human rights risks in the design, development, use and sales of AI solutions and exert 
its leverage to guide discussions towards an enabling environment where risks to 
people are effectively addressed.
Ethical challenges presented by AI and ML, specifically trustworthiness, human oversight, bias and transparency
 56What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ł Ericsson decided in 2019 not to create yet another set of ethical principles for AI 
development, but rather work with existing standards. Following this decision, and 
based on comprehensive analyses of existing standards, it decided to adopt the 
European Commission Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI and implement these 
guidelines into Ericsson policies and processes. The EC Guidelines outline seven 
principles for trustworthy AI:
1. Human agency and oversight: AI systems should empower human beings, 
allowing them to make informed decisions and fostering their fundamental 
rights. At the same time, proper oversight mechanisms need to be ensured, which 
can be achieved through human-in-the-loop, human-on-the-loop and human-
in-command approaches.
2. Technical robustness and safety: AI systems need to be resilient and secure. They 
need to be safe, ensuring a fallback plan in case something goes wrong, as well 
as being accurate, reliable and reproducible. That is the only way to ensure that 
also unintentional harm can be minimized and prevented.
3. Privacy and data governance: Besides ensuring full respect for privacy and data 
protection, adequate data governance mechanisms must also be ensured, taking 
into account the quality and integrity of the data and ensuring legitimized access 
to data.
4. Transparency: The data, system and AI business models should be transparent. 
Traceability mechanisms can help achieve this. AI systems and their decisions 
should be explained in a manner adapted to the stakeholder concerned. Humans 
need to be aware that they are interacting with an AI system and must be 
informed of the system™s capabilities and limitations.
5. Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness: Unfair bias must be avoided, as 
it could have multiple negative implications, from the marginalization of 
vulnerable groups, to the exacerbation of prejudice and discrimination. Fostering 
diversity, AI systems should be accessible to all, regardless of any disability, and 
involve relevant stakeholders throughout their entire life cycle.
6. Societal and environmental wellbeing: AI systems should benefit all human 
beings, including future generations. It must be ensured that they are sustainable 
and environmentally friendly. Moreover, they should take into account the 
environment, including other living beings, and their social and societal impact 
should be carefully considered.
7. Accountability: Mechanisms should be put in place to ensure responsibility and 
accountability for AI systems and their outcomes. Auditability, which enables the 
assessment of algorithms, data and design processes, plays a key role, especially 
in critical applications. Adequate and accessible redress should also be ensured.
Ł Ericsson has a good understanding of what challenges it needs to address in order 
to minimize possible negative effects of its technology. It now needs to create 
practical ways to implement these findings across relevant functions within the 
company Œ a toolkit it can use to operationalize the ethical principles. So far, 
specific design rules based on the EU AI Guidelines have been developed.
Ł The challenges and risks related to trustworthy AI will most likely be addressed 
through national or regional legislation and regulations, policy frameworks and/
or standardization. Examples of such regulations are already emerging. There 
is an ongoing discussion with the EU to understand the need to turn part of the 
EC Guidelines into European-wide policies or regulations in the area. In parallel, 
standardization bodies such as ITU, IEEE, ETSI, CEN/CENELEC, NIST, SIS and ISO 
have started working groups to explore the options for standardization. 
Ethical challenges presented by AI and ML, specifically trustworthiness, human oversight, bias and transparency
 57What actions is Ericsson taking 
and what additional actions will 
Ericsson take to prevent and 
mitigate this impact?
Ł As with all regulation and standardization efforts, being part of the ongoing 
process provides a possibility to influence the outcome. Regulations and standards 
will help the industry to create truly global solutions that adhere to the challenges 
previously described. However, if they are too rigid, they might create barriers and 
infuse fear in society that will hinder further innovation and/or positive usage 
of the technology. Ericsson has a responsibility to push for regulation that has a 
clear human rights approach and is aligned with other legal developments within 
responsible business, such as the introduction of mandatory human rights due 
diligence requirements.
Ł Not all the challenges discussed are topical for the telecom industry, but for those 
that are, Ericsson needs to conduct risk assessments and ask itself what the impact 
is if something goes wrong. In addition, it needs to be mindful that depending upon 
context, some principles may override others, and for various AI use cases, these 
will apply differently. 
Ł There is still a lot to learn in this area. Together with its stakeholders, Ericsson 
needs to define a set of relevant use cases topical for mobile connectivity to refine 
requirements and define assessment methodology.
Ethical challenges presented by AI and ML, specifically trustworthiness, human oversight, bias and transparency
 58Many of the identified impact areas touch 
upon cross-cutting themes and issues that 
need a centralized and coordinated effort, 
rather than just an issue or business area 
approach. Such cross-cutting attention 
recognizes the interconnectedness of 
issues and the need to address them 
holistically if Ericsson is to effectively 
take action to prevent and mitigate 
human rights risks as they relate to 5G. 
Cross-cutting attention and coordination 
also emphasizes and facilitates shared 
responsibility for human rights risks and 
responding to them. The following are key 
internal processes and frameworks needed 
to address these cross-cutting issues.
The Sensitive Business framework
The main framework through which 
Ericsson manages human rights risks 
relating to customers and misuse of its 
technology is the Sensitive Business 
framework. This due diligence process 
was one of the first of its kind in the ICT 
industry when it was developed more than 
a decade ago and is still a leading process. 
The framework aims to ensure that 
business opportunities and engagements 
are conducted in accordance with 
international human rights standards.
 The Sensitive Business Board, part 
of the Sensitive Business framework, is 
a company-wide forum that comprises 
Ericsson™s senior management, oversees 
the execution of the Sensitive Business 
framework and meets regularly. When 
the Sensitive Business automated tool 
identifies risks in a sales opportunity, 
the Market Area submits an approval 
request, which the Sensitive Business 
unit evaluates according to its business 
risk methodology (which includes 
country risk, customer risk, product 
risk and purpose risk). Cases are 
approved, approved with conditions 
or rejected. Conditional approvals 
include technology and/or contractual 
mitigations, and its implementation is 
monitored to ensure adherence.
 The Sensitive Business framework 
is currently undergoing a major 
transformation. The transformation 
will, through the introduction of a more 
automated process, enable Ericsson to 
focus its resources on more complicated 
and high-risk cases, while ensuring that a 
larger number of cases are fully evaluated. 
In order to further strengthen and align 
the framework with the UN Guiding 
Principles, the following additional 
actions are identified:
Ł The scope of the evaluated human 
rights risks needs to be expanded, in 
order to cover not just the rights to 
privacy and freedom of expression. 
While these risks are still identified 
as the most salient for Ericsson in 
relation to end use of its technology, 
additional risks such as conflict-related impacts need to be addressed. 
Ericsson is currently in the process 
of expanding the Sensitive Business 
methodology to ensure a broader set 
of risks are covered.
Ł Tracking performance of actions 
taken and acting on actual impacts 
is challenging to manage. In order to 
cover the full scope of human rights 
due diligence, these challenges need to be addressed. Ericsson is currently 
exploring ways of including rights 
to verification of agreed contractual 
mitigations and use cases. Given 
that potential misuse of technology 
is often linked to national security 
in a specific country, verifying such 
misuse is difficult. Nevertheless, this is 
an identified improvement area that 
it needs to address in order to better 
react in case misuse is identified.
Ł Beyond contractual or technical 
mitigations, or alternatively deciding 
not to sell to a particular customer (for 
example because of its track record on 
human rights), Ericsson is exploring 
how to expand the measures used 
to prevent and mitigate risk. This 
includes building and applying leverage of various kinds, including 
commercial leverage, other bilateral 
engagement such as capacity 
building and awareness raising (for 
example of customers and civil society 
organizations) and collaboration with 
peers to create industry-wide change 
or engage governments jointly. To 
some extent these types of actions 
are pursued through Ericsson™s 
membership in the GNI. However, 
 it is considering how to scale up 
 its approach.
Key internal frameworks and processes can help centralize and coordinate efforts to 
address human rights risks. Ericsson™s processes include use of the Sensitive Business 
framework, responsible sourcing and remedy and grievance mechanisms.
Cross-cutting actions
 59 Find out more about 
supply chain human rights
Responsible sourcing
A significant portion of Ericsson™s human 
rights risks can be found in its supply 
chain. This is also true for the rollout of 
5G. In order to have a more focused and 
proactive approach to addressing human 
rights risks in its supply chain, Ericsson 
recently conducted a detailed analysis of 
its supply chain to define salient human 
rights risks. 
 Ericsson has developed the list of salient 
supply chain human rights issues based 
on internal and external expertise and 
stakeholder consultations, audit results 
and comprehensive analysis of its supplier 
categories, including factors such as 
relevant industry, type of activities, country 
of operations and nature of the workforce, 
including potential vulnerable groups.¹³ 
 While the full scope of human rights 
risks will continuously be managed 
through Ericsson™s Responsible 
Sourcing Program, the identified salient 
risks will be addressed through more 
focused, proactive and collaborative 
engagements. Some of the identified 
salient issues have direct bearing 
on the human rights risks identified 
through this 5G assessment process, 
including occupational health and safety (relating to rollout of physical 
network infrastructure), right to an 
adequate standard of living (relating 
to workers potentially losing their jobs 
due to robotization accelerated by 5G) 
and conflict-related impacts (relating 
to potentially increased demand for 
conflict minerals). 
 Ericsson is currently in the process of 
developing more detailed action plans 
to respond to the identified risks. Risks 
to human rights and the vulnerability of 
workers in supply chains have become 
more apparent during the current 
COVID-19 crisis, which has hit the most 
vulnerable people in the most severe 
ways. Ericsson applied the explicit lens of 
vulnerability, not just in the identification 
of salient issues, but also in the rollout of 
further actions as part of the Responsible 
Sourcing Program.
 60Remedy and grievance mechanisms
According to the UN Guiding Principles, 
when Ericsson has caused or contributed 
to a human rights impact it has a 
responsibility to take action to provide or 
enable remedy. Where Ericsson is linked 
to an impact, it should apply leverage to 
move business partners in the value chain 
to take appropriate action, including to 
provide remedy. 
 Ericsson has acknowledged this 
responsibility in its steering documents, 
such as the Code of Business Ethics 
and the Business and Human Rights 
Statement. Developing grievance 
mechanisms and processes to implement 
this responsibility can also provide useful 
information to help track performance and 
identify and address impacts before they 
escalate into bigger issues for people and 
the company. As such, effective grievance 
mechanisms and a holistic approach to 
remedy is an integral part of human rights 
due diligence and implementing the 
 UN Guiding Principles.
Ericsson has identified the need to further 
strengthen its approach to remedy and 
grievance mechanisms, to effectively 
address the full scope of human rights 
risks across its value chain. 
  One of the main challenges is to make 
sure that mechanisms are accessible 
to all stakeholder groups. As a network 
vendor, Ericsson does not have a 
relationship with individual end users 
that might be impacted. Its grievance 
mechanisms are therefore not well 
known or used. 
 The Ericsson Code of Business Ethics 
(CoBE) has been updated to better 
explain its responsibility to respect 
human rights and how complaints are 
addressed. Additionally, Ericsson is 
engaged in the B-Tech Project driven 
by the Office of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights. A key component 
of the B-Tech Project is to identify 
how to establish effective grievance 
mechanisms in the ICT industry.
B-Tech Project 
A key component is establishing 
effective grievance mechanisms in 
the ICT industry.
 61Many of the issues will need further 
analysis, sector-wide and multi-stakeholder 
collaboration, as well as re-evaluation as 
more is learned about 5G technology and 
potential human rights impacts.
Monitoring
For many of the impact areas, Ericsson 
already has internal processes and 
programs to monitor risk and actions 
taken; for example, the Sensitive 
Business framework, the Responsible 
Sourcing Program, the Ericsson SRM 
and environmental health and safety 
management systems. Through these 
established processes, Ericsson will 
continue to identify and address risks, as 
well as frequently evolve and strengthen 
its processes based on learnings. 
 In addition, based on the learnings from this assessment, Ericsson is in 
the process of establishing an updated 
human rights impact assessment 
methodology that will form the 
basis of future assessments. Such 
assessments can focus on country-level 
operations, new technologies or specific 
business engagements. The updated 
methodology will be piloted and refined 
through selected initial assessments.
 Some of the impact areas, for example 
job transitions and digital inclusion, 
require actions and broader collaboration 
with external stakeholders, beyond 
Ericsson procedures. These impact areas 
will need further analysis in order to 
determine effective mitigation strategies.
 As mentioned in the introduction to 
this report, this is an initial assessment 
based on what is currently known 
about human rights risks related to 5G 
technology. The listed actions respond 
to the identified impacts so far. By 
conducting this assessment, Ericsson 
has proactively engaged with relevant 
group functions and business areas 
to build awareness across Ericsson on 
human rights impacts connected 
 to 5G. This engagement enables 
Ericsson to more effectively identify 
which functions within the company 
need to be engaged in addressing new 
and emerging risks within each impact 
area. It will periodically review actions 
taken and evaluate if additional 
actions are needed.
 This will be done through engagement 
with appointed internal stakeholders for 
each impact area.
Governance
Many of the identified impact areas are 
already addressed through existing Ericsson 
programs, frameworks and processes, 
which are built on established governance 
structures with reporting lines and targets. 
As mentioned, some of the impact areas 
need further analysis to fully grasp how to 
develop effective strategies and governance 
structures to address these issues. Ericsson 
will continue to engage with internal and 
external stakeholders on these topics in order 
to develop a clear approach.
 To ensure that the identified impact areas 
and suggested actions presented in this 
report are addressed, the cross-functional 
team of internal stakeholders that has 
contributed to this report will monitor 
progress within each impact area. Periodic 
updates will also be shared with external 
stakeholders to continue developing action 
plans for further mitigation.
 While all of the existing Ericsson processes 
that manage identified risks will continue to 
feed into a periodical review of the findings 
of this assessment, in order to make sure 
emerging impact areas are identified early 
on, the cross-functional team will ensure that 
Ericsson has a centralized approach to 5G 
and human rights.
This section of the report covers how the identified 
 impact areas will be addressed moving forward.
Monitoring, governance 
and stakeholder 
engagement
 62Stakeholder engagement
Stakeholder engagement was a crucial 
part of this 5G assessment process. The 
dialogue with external stakeholders 
enabled Ericsson to correctly frame the 
impact areas, ﬁtranslateﬂ the findings 
for various stakeholder groups, identify 
improvement areas in its processes 
and establish the groundwork for 
further engagement.
 An important next step in acting 
on the findings of this report is to 
include external stakeholders in further 
developing preventions and mitigations. 
Ericsson will use this report as a starting 
point to engage external stakeholders 
on the topic of 5G and human rights, 
with the aim of building joint leverage 
and a common understanding across
 the ICT industry. 
 One challenge, already identified 
in the initial stages of this report, 
is to engage potentially affected 
stakeholders (people and communities 
whose human rights might be adversely 
impacted through Ericsson™s business 
operations, products or services), in 
addition to expert stakeholders and 
credible proxies (organizations that can 
provide insight into the perspectives 
of affected stakeholders), especially in 
high-risk contexts. Working with peers 
and customers might be an effective 
way of addressing this challenge 
and jointly engaging with potentially 
affected stakeholders.
 Additionally, an area for further 
improvement is how to ensure stakeholder 
perspectives are more effectively included 
in existing frameworks and internal due 
diligence procedures. Other companies 
and organizations have for example 
established external stakeholder advisory 
boards, which can provide input and 
guidance on a more systematic basis.
 Another area of improvement, 
which also enables better stakeholder 
engagement, is more detailed reporting 
on human rights, including as it relates 
to 5G. The publication of this report is 
an attempt to, in a transparent way, 
identify impact areas that need further 
engagement. Ericsson will actively 
engage external stakeholders on these 
topics and welcomes a constructive 
dialogue on how to further develop and 
improve actions taken.
 In case of actual impacts, Ericsson 
encourages affected stakeholders to 
reach out to it with concerns through 
the Ericsson Compliance Line, or other 
channels where appropriate. The 
Compliance Line is available for internal 
and external stakeholders and covers 
human rights impacts connected to 
its business. As previously mentioned, 
Ericsson has identified a need to 
strengthen its grievance mechanisms to 
ensure human rights are more effectively 
addressed. However, raising concerns 
through the Compliance Line will receive 
the proper attention. 
 Ericsson has a clear commitment, 
articulated in its Business and 
Human Rights Statement, to assume 
accountability by providing access to 
remedy in cases when it has caused or 
contributed to adverse human rights 
impacts and use its leverage with business 
partners if directly linked to such impacts.
 Receiving and evaluating grievance 
is a crucial step in effectively managing 
the known impact areas and identifying 
new ones. Ericsson therefore welcomes 
stakeholder engagement through 
raised concerns and will work with 
stakeholders to identify appropriate 
remedy, as well as ways to further 
improve its grievance mechanisms.
Improvement 
 Ensure stakeholders™ views are 
included in existing frameworks.
 63Communication and reporting
This assessment process is a key factor 
in identifying prioritized actions and 
improvement areas related to human 
rights across Ericsson™s operations and 
value chain. The findings of this report 
will form the basis for further reporting 
on progress within the area of human 
rights and responsible business. Ericsson 
will track the performance of identified 
actions through its annual reporting, as 
well as periodical updates on progress 
where needed.
When new issues and potential impact 
areas emerge through Ericsson™s 
due diligence procedures or through 
communication from and engagement 
with stakeholders, these will be 
included in its external reporting. By 
addressing the identified impact areas in 
collaboration with stakeholders, Ericsson 
ensures that progress is shared through 
ongoing dialogue. While conducting additional human rights 
impact assessments Œ whether country or 
technology specific Œ Ericsson will further 
engage and report on actions taken in 
relation to the more specific context of 
each assessment.
 64While this assessment report provides an 
overview of the potential human rights 
impacts connected to 5G technology, 
mainly from a network vendor perspective, 
the identified risks are relevant for the ICT 
industry as a whole to address. A clear 
conclusion of this assessment is that the 
identified impact areas to a large extent 
are cross-cutting, from both an internal 
Ericsson perspective and looking at the 
ICT industry as a whole. While individual 
company responsibility is paramount, 
the human rights challenges surrounding 
ICT must also be addressed through a 
multi-stakeholder approach. A single actor 
in the ICT ecosystem will not be able to 
effectively mitigate the full range of risks 
associated with 5G technology on its own.
 While technological developments 
such as 5G undoubtedly bring substantial 
societal benefits, it is equally important 
to acknowledge the potential misuse 
and unintended consequences of such 
advances. Certainly, the relationship 
between human rights, ICT, law 
enforcement and national security is 
complex. At one end of the spectrum, 
technology delivers connectivity and 
empowerment and contributes to more 
transparent, safer societies. At the other 
end, unmitigated, unintended use of ICT 
can result in persecution, repression and 
human rights violations. It is important to 
keep these two perspectives in mind when 
developing, providing and using 
 ICT solutions.
 As part of Ericsson™s responsibility 
to respect human rights, it needs to 
proactively engage with issues that can 
lead to adverse human rights impacts as a 
result of its operations, products, services 
and business relationships. Ericsson 
does not claim to have all the answers, 
or provide an exhaustive list of risks. But 
it believes that this assessment can form 
a strong foundation and starting point 
for the ICT industry to jointly establish a 
comprehensive approach to addressing 
human rights risks and inspire others to 
conduct similar assessments based on 
their operations and experiences. Only 
through shared learning, collective actions 
and transparent actions will some of the 
more complex challenges in the industry 
be effectively addressed.
 Clearly defining respective roles and 
responsibilities is critical for developing 
a successful ICT ecosystem-wide 
approach in respect of human rights. By 
engaging with the entire industry, as well 
as focusing on Ericsson™s own power to 
influence and shape the debate, it can 
better identify concrete steps that each 
actor in the chain can take to avoid or 
mitigate human rights risks.
 Moving forward, Ericsson™s focus will 
be broad dissemination of the report itself 
and targeted engagements with peers, 
customers, governments and civil society 
organizations to establish collaborations 
aimed at incorporating a comprehensive 
human rights approach in the rollout of 
5G, as well as future management of the 
networks. By effectively mitigating and 
addressing human rights risks, Ericsson 
can truly leverage the positive impacts the 
ICT industry brings to the communities in 
which it operates and society in general.
While individual corporate responsibility is vital, the 
human rights challenges surrounding ICT must be 
addressed through a multi-stakeholder approach.
Conclusion 65AppendixAccess Now
 is a global civil society 
organization focused on digital rights. 
The engagement with Access Now 
centered on a broad range of emerging 
potential risks connected to 5G technology 
and a more connected society, as well as 
the role companies can play in mitigating 
risks at early stages of development of 
their products and solutions.
Vodafone Group
 is one of the world™s 
largest telecommunications companies 
and provides a range of services 
including voice, messaging, data and 
fixed communications. The discussion 
with Vodafone mainly touched on the 
relationship between network vendors 
and mobile operators, identifying common 
risks but also distinct responsibilities.
The Global Network Initiative (GNI)
 is a multi-stakeholder initiative focusing 
on protecting and advancing freedom of 
expression and privacy rights in the ICT 
industry, by setting a global standard for 
responsible company decision making and 
serving. Ericsson is a member of the GNI 
and discussed with the organization the 
application of the GNI Principles in the 
context of this assessment process, as well 
as issues that have previously been raised 
through GNI learning calls, briefs and 
public engagements on the topic of 5G
 and human rights.
Telia Company
 is a mobile operator 
headquartered in Sweden, with 
operations across the Nordic and Baltic 
countries. The engagement with Telia 
Company focused on priorities from a 
mobile operator perspective  and the 
impact areas that are well suited for 
collaboration, as well as the cases in 
which collaboration might be challenging. 
Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT)
 is a civil society organization working to 
promote democratic values by shaping 
technology policy and architecture, with 
 a focus on the rights of the individual. 
 The organization has offices in the US 
 and Belgium.Meg Roggensack
 is an adjunct professor at Georgetown Law and 
expert on business and human 
rights. The engagement focused on 
risks related to digital inclusion, both 
from the perspective of coverage 
and connectivity and in relation to 
how technology could exacerbate 
human rights impacts due to 
existing factors such as structural 
inequalities and biases.Jessica Fjeld is Assistant Director of 
the Cyberlaw Clinic at the Berkman 
Klein Center for Internet and Society at 
Harvard University. Some of the main 
topics raised as part of the engagement 
were the specific impacts on women of 
the identified risks, as well as potential 
ways to effectively regulate some of the 
impact areas.
Digital Rights Foundation
 is a research-based civil society organization 
working to strengthen protections for 
human rights defenders, with a focus 
on women™s rights, in digital spaces. 
The organization is based in Pakistan 
and works throughout the region. The 
engagement focused on risks women 
face in connection to ICT, especially in 
Pakistan and neighboring countries.
Paradigm Initiative
 is a social enterprise 
that builds an ICT-enabled support 
system and advocates digital rights in 
order to improve livelihoods for under-
served youth. The organization has offices 
in Nigeria, Cameroon, Kenya, Ghana, 
Zambia and Zimbabwe and works across 
the African continent. The engagement 
focused on perspectives and risks from 
the region, as well as examples of how 
companies and civil society can collaborate 
to promote digital rights.
External stakeholders 
interviewed for this study
 The content of this document is subject to 
revision without notice due to continued 
progress in methodology, design and 
manufacturing. Ericsson shall have no 
liability for any error or damage of any kind 
resulting from the use of this document
EricssonSE-164 80 Stockholm, Sweden
 Telephone +46 10 719 0000
 www.ericsson.com
1778-EN/LZT 138 1416
© Ericsson 2021Ericsson enables communications service providers 
 to capture the full value of connectivity. The company™s 
portfolio spans Networks, Digital Services, Managed 
Services, and Emerging Business and is designed to
 help our customers go digital, increase efficiency and 
find new revenue streams. Ericsson™s investments in 
innovation have delivered the benefits of telephony 
 and mobile broadband to billions of people around 
 the world. The Ericsson stock is listed on Nasdaq 
 Stockholm and on Nasdaq New York.
www.ericsson.com
